
   Long before Commodore Perry got there, Japanese castaways and American
   whalers were prising Japan open

                                         Blackburn Museum and Art Gallery

                      Blackburn Museum and Art Gallery

     IF THAT double-bolted land, Japan, is ever to become hospitable, it
     is the whale-ship alone to whom the credit will be due; for already
     she is on the threshold.

     Herman Melville, "Moby Dick", 1851

   The first English-language teacher to come to Japan landed in a tiny
   skiff, but before he did so, Ranald MacDonald pulled the bung from his
   boat in order to half-swamp her, in the hope of winning over locals
   with a story that he had come as someone who had fled the cruel
   tyrannies of a whale-ship captain and then been shipwrecked. The four
   locals who approached by boat, though certainly amazed, were also
   courteous, for they bowed low, stroked their huge beards and emitted a
   throaty rumbling. "How do you do?" MacDonald cheerily replied. This
   meeting took place in tiny Nutsuka Cove on Rishiri Island off Hokkaido
   on July 1st 1848, and a dark basaltic pebble from the cove sits on
   this correspondent's desk as he writes, picked up from between the
   narrow fishing skiffs that even today are pulled up on the beach.

   Rishiri is about as perfect a round volcanic island, perhaps nine
   miles across, as it is possible for a schoolchild to draw. It is also
   just about as far north in Japan proper as it is possible to be: if
   you start climbing the volcano, the coast of Russian Sakhalin comes
   into view. MacDonald took an intentionally oblique route to get into
   closed Japan. And indeed, the locals who approached MacDonald were not
   Japanese at all, but rather the supremely hairy Ainu, whose women
   tattooed their upper lip.

   The Ainu were the original inhabitants of much of northern Japan,
   while related groups had long settled Sakhalin and Kamchatka. One
   19th-century British explorer and naval captain, Henry Craven St John,
   described the fair-skinned Ainu as "something like a strange drop of
   oil in the Ocean, being surrounded by Mongols [including Japanese] yet
   not one of them." But just as European settlers were pushing the
   American frontier westwards--MacDonald himself was born in present-day
   Oregon of Princess Raven, favourite daughter of the Chinook king, and
   a Scottish fur trader with the Hudson's Bay Company--so the Japanese
   were pushing north. Modern-day Hokkaido (literally, the way to the
   northern seas) was then known as Ezo, whose written characters connote
   wildness and barbarity. Today, only vestigial communities of Ainu
   survive.

   Far from fleeing a tyrant, MacDonald had in fact had to plead with a
   concerned captain of the Plymouth, a whaler out of Sag Harbour, New
   York, to be put down in the waters near Japan. MacDonald had an
   insatiable hunger for adventure, and the desire to enter
   Japan--tantalisingly shut to the outside world--had taken a grip on
   him. Both men knew of the risks, but the captain was less inclined to
   discount them. For 250 years, since the Tokugawa shogunate kicked
   Christian missionaries and traders out, only a tightly controlled
   trade with the Netherlands and China was tolerated in the southern
   port of Nagasaki, with a further licence for Koreans elsewhere. Though
   British and Russian ships had from time to time prodded Japan's
   carapace, an edict in 1825 spelled out what would happen to uninvited
   guests "demanding firewood, water and provisions":

     The continuation of such insolent proceedings, as also the
     intention of introducing the Christian religion having come to our
     knowledge, it is impossible to look on with indifference. If in
     future foreign vessels should come near any port whatsoever, the
     local inhabitants shall conjointly drive them away; but should they
     go away peaceably it is not necessary to pursue them. Should any
     foreigners land anywhere, they must be arrested or killed, and if
     the ship approaches the shore it must be destroyed.

   Two decades later the despotic feudalism of the Tokugawa shogunate was
   under greater strain. At home the land had been ravaged by floods and
   earthquakes, and famines had driven the dispossessed and even samurai
   to storm the rice warehouses of the daimyo, the local lords. Abroad,
   Western powers were making ominous inroads. After the opium war of
   1840-42 China ceded Hong Kong to Britain. Meanwhile, thanks to a
   growth in whaling and trade with China, the number of distressed
   Western vessels appearing along Japan's shores was increasing.
   Moderate voices made themselves heard within the government. A new
   edict was softer:

     It is not thought fitting to drive away all foreign ships
     irrespective of their condition, in spite of their lack of
     supplies, or of their having stranded or their suffering from
     stress of weather. You should, when necessary, supply them with
     food and fuel and advise them to return, but on no account allow
     foreigners to land. If, however, after receiving supplies and
     instructions they do not withdraw, you will, of course drive them
     away.

   MacDonald knew the risks, and approached Japan obliquely in order to
   minimise them. Even so, he spent the next ten months in captivity.

   Ocean streams

   MacDonald's curiosity about Japan had first been aroused as a child,
   with the arrival in 1834 of three Japanese castaways. More than a year
   earlier a full Japanese crew had set off in the Hojun-maru from the
   port of Toba with a cargo of rice and ceramics intended as annual
   tribute for the shogun up the coast in Edo (modern-day Tokyo). Very
   quickly they were blown offshore by a sudden autumn storm. Fourteen
   months later the crippled junk and its survivors were washed ashore on
   Cape Flattery, in current-day Washington state, along with the bales
   of rice and boxes of fine porcelain. A delighted band of Makah Indians
   seized what they could of the cargo and enslaved the survivors. The
   Hudson's Bay Company, who traded with the Makah, found the sailors and
   bought them.

   Seafarers from the isles of Japan have been drifting eastwards in
   crippled vessels for hundreds of years, and perhaps millennia.
   Presumably, they mingled blood if they survived along the
   way--MacDonald himself felt he might be a recipient.

   Their conveyor belt was the Kuroshio (Black) Current, named after the
   deep colour of its waters. The Kuroshio is the north Pacific's Gulf
   Stream, for it brings warm water from the tropics up east of Taiwan,
   north-eastwards along the Japanese coast and on towards the polar
   regions, sweeping east below the Aleutian isles and down the American
   coast (see map). To this day Japanese fishing floats and even monks'
   wooden sandals are washed up on the shores of the Pacific Northwest.
   Katherine Plummer in "The Shogun's Reluctant Ambassadors: Japanese Sea
   Drifters in the North Pacific" (Oregon Historical Society, 1991)
   relates the case of the ghost ship Ryoei-maru, a motorised but
   stricken coastal fishing boat found off Vancouver Island in 1927 with
   the parched corpses of the crew on board and a poignant diary of their
   last days.

   So tyrannically did the Tokugawa shogunate wish to deny its subjects
   outside knowledge that it was not just foreign sailors on the coast
   who risked punishment. Japanese sailors were not allowed to leave the
   country. They knew that if ever they were shipwrecked on foreign
   shores, then they were barred from returning to Japan. Some survivors
   came back regardless: sometimes a Russian ship would put them down
   among the Kurile Islands in a baidarka, a local canoe, loaded with
   provisions; the sailor would then make his way alone to Ezo. Others
   came back to Nagasaki via China on Chinese junks, with the help of
   Western missionaries, but if execution did not always follow, a stiff
   and lengthy interrogation certainly did.

   Tokugawa xenophobia increased the risks of wreck or drift. To prevent
   sailors going abroad, shipbuilding rules restricted the seaworthiness
   of Japanese vessels. The coastal traders that brought grain and other
   tribute to Edo were in essence overloaded arks. They lacked stability.
   The wind caught their high sterns, hampering manoeuvrability.
   Meanwhile, they lacked the sturdy centre-mounted rudders of Chinese
   junks or Western craft, and Japanese rudders mounted to one side
   snapped readily in heavy seas, just when the craft most needed
   steerage.

   To reduce the risk of foundering in a storm, the crew of a rudderless
   craft would cut down the mast, turning their vessel into a hulk, at
   the mercy of wind and waves. The crews of such stricken ships tended
   to turn spiritual. In 1813, according to a later account by the
   captain, Jukichi, the crew of Tokujo-maru, blown off-course for Edo
   with a cargo of rice, cut their top-knots as an act of purification,
   and one crew member shaved his head to become a monk. They prayed to
   Buddhist and Shinto gods (every vessel carried a shrine), and they
   prepared divination papers to find out where they were. After a year
   and a half of drifting, during which most of the crew died, three
   survivors were picked up by a British ship off the coast of
   California.

   Jukichi, reckoned to be the first recorded Japanese to land in
   America, returned home four years later, via Alaska and Kamchatka, and
   spent the first night in the village temple, as he had promised the
   gods. He spent the rest of his life begging funds for the memorial
   stone he had promised his crew.

   The shogunate's hungry demand for tribute, which forced many vessels
   to set sail after the autumn rice harvest, no doubt increased the
   number of sea-drifters: that there was a word for them, hyoryumin,
   attests to their number. The plentiful supply of krill at the point
   where the warm waters of the Kuroshio meet Arctic waters, which
   attracted whales, no doubt increased the number of hyoryumin picked up
   by Western ships. A whaler from Brighton, Massachusetts, is reckoned
   to have been the first in Japanese waters, in 1820, when it came upon
   a pod of sperm whales. A year later 30 American ships cruised around
   Japan, and by 1839 the number of Western whalers had grown to 550,
   four-fifths of them American. It was off Japan, of course, that
   Captain Ahab lost his leg ("dismasted") to the great white whale that
   was his nemesis, and in Herman Melville's imagination the mystery and
   danger of Moby Dick is fused with the land around which he swims.

   As the north Pacific became more crowded, some of the Japanese
   sea-drifters were bound to help unlock the double-bolted land even
   before Commodore Matthew Perry steamed into Edo Bay in 1853 demanding
   recognition for the United States. One such was Otokichi, the youngest
   of the three found enslaved near Cape Flattery. The Hudson's Bay
   Company factor had sent the crew to London, with a notion that they
   might be used as a means to open up trade with Japan. They were then
   shipped to Macau, where they helped Karl Gutzlaff, an indefatigable
   missionary with a Hong Kong street still named after him, to translate
   St John's gospel into Japanese. They hoped to return to Japan in an
   American trader, but the vessel met with cannon fire in Edo Bay and
   Kagoshima. Rebuffed, they resumed their life in Macau.

   Otokichi went on to Shanghai to work for a British trading company,
   married an Englishwoman--perhaps the first Japanese to do so--and
   prospered; after her death he married an Indian. As a British subject,
   John Matthew Ottoson was to return twice to Japan, the second time
   with the Royal Navy in 1854, to act as translator during the
   negotiations that opened Japan up to British trade. He is buried in
   the Japanese Cemetery in Singapore.

   Manjiro, who made it back

   The most famous sea-drifter is known in the West and even Japan as
   John Manjiro. Two days after Melville set off in early 1841 from
   Fairhaven, Massachusetts, on the whaling adventure that provided the
   material for "Moby Dick", Manjiro, the youngest of five crew, set out
   fishing near his village of Nakanohama on the rugged south-western
   coast of Shikoku, one of Japan's four main islands. On the fourth day,
   the skipper saw black clouds looming and ordered the boat to be rowed
   to shore. It was too late. Over two weeks they drifted east almost 400
   miles, landing on Torishima, a barren volcanic speck whose only
   sustenance was brackish water lying in puddles and nesting seabirds.
   In late summer even the albatrosses left. After five months, while out
   scavenging, Manjiro saw a ship sailing towards the island.

   The castaways' saviour, William Whitfield, captain of the John
   Howland, a Fairhaven whaler, took a shine to the sparky lad. In
   Honolulu he asked Manjiro if he wanted to carry on to Fairhaven. The
   boy did, studied at Bartlett's Academy, which taught maths and
   navigation to its boys, went to church and fell for local girls. He
   later signed on for a three-year whaling voyage to the Pacific, and
   when he returned, joined a lumber ship bound round Cape Horn for San
   Francisco and the California gold rush. He made a handsome sum and
   found passage back to Honolulu.

   By early 1851--the year of "Moby Dick" and two years before Commodore
   Perry turned up--Manjiro was at last back in Japan, and things were
   already changing. He and two of the original crew had been dropped in
   their open sailing boat by an American whaling ship off the Ryukyu
   Islands. They were taken to Kagoshima, seat of the Satsuma clan. The
   local daimyo, Shimazu Nariakira, grilled Manjiro, but the tone was
   inquisitive more than inquisitorial: please to explain the steamship,
   trains, photography, etc. In Nagasaki, Manjiro had to trample on an
   image of the Virgin and child. He was asked whether the katsura bush
   could be seen from America growing on the moon. He described America's
   system of government, the modest living of the president and how New
   Englanders were so industrious that they used their time on the
   lavatory to read. Amazingly, he dared criticise Japan's ill-treatment
   of foreign ships in need of wood and water, and made a heartfelt plea
   for the opening of Japan, going so far as to put the American case for
   a coal-bunkering station in Japan to allow steamships to cross the
   Pacific from California to China.

                                              Leeds Museums and Galleries

                        Leeds Museums and Galleries

   Rather than being kept in prison, he was freed to visit his mother--in
   Nakanohana she showed him his memorial stone--and was even made a
   samurai. In Tosa (modern-day Kochi), he taught English to men who were
   later influential during the overthrow of the shogunate and the
   establishment of constitutional government in the Meiji period, from
   1860. During negotiations in 1854 with Perry, Manjiro acted as an
   interpreter. Later, in 1860, he joined the first Japanese embassy to
   America. But as Christopher Benfey explains in "The Great Wave: Gilded
   Age Misfits, Japanese Eccentrics and the Opening of Old Japan" (Random
   House, 2003), if the terror of being lost at sea was the defining
   experience of Manjiro's life, then his greatest gift to the Japanese
   was his translation of Nathaniel Bowditch's "The New American
   Practical Navigator", known to generations of mariners as the
   "seaman's bible".

   As for Ranald MacDonald, though he was handed over by the Ainu and
   taken by junk to Nagasaki for interrogation, he was treated decently.
   With a respectable education and a gentle presence, he was clearly a
   cut above the usual rough-necked castaway, and he was put to teaching
   English. Some of the students who came to his cell later flourished as
   interpreters and compilers of dictionaries. The most notable, Einosuke
   Moriyama, served as the chief translator in Japan's negotiations with
   Perry, as well as interpreter to America's first consul to Japan,
   Townsend Harris.

   In the spring of 1849 the American warship Preble arrived in Nagasaki,
   its commander, James Glynn, ignoring the imprecations from assorted
   Japanese craft to "go away, go away". The American government had
   heard that the Lagoda, an American whaler, had been wrecked on the
   Japanese coast and a number of crew taken prisoner. (Historians now
   think the crew, whose numbers had diminished in prison through
   sickness and a suicide, were deserters.) The Preble was dispatched
   from Hong Kong to rescue them, the government thinking no doubt this
   was also a useful exercise in testing Japan's exclusionary resolve. To
   Glynn's surprise, he learnt that MacDonald, who had been presumed
   dead, was also in Nagasaki. The Preble carried the exultant adventurer
   to Macau, where he promptly signed on a ship that took him to
   Australia's goldfields.

   A secret no more

   Very soon after, Japan opened to the world. Its adoption of
   industrialisation and Western constitutional government was perhaps
   the most abrupt transformation of a country in history. That is well
   recorded. Less noticed was the change to sailors around Japan's
   coasts. Yet St John, the British explorer, relates a foreign shipwreck
   on Hokkaido just two decades after MacDonald left Nagasaki. The
   captain of the Eliza Corry was found by locals close to death on the
   shore. In short order, they made European clothes for him, even
   finding him a wide-awake hat. A table, fork and small and large spoon
   were fashioned for him, while a junk, dispatched in a hurry, returned
   with three Californian apples and three sheets of foreign notepaper to
   complete his contentment.

   As for whaling around Japan, vestigial echoes reverberate. Every
   northern winter, Japan faces barbs for sending a whaling fleet into
   Antarctic waters. And why, asks the mayor of Taiji, a small whaling
   port, should Japanese ships have to go so far, suffering international
   outrage? Because, he says, answering his own question, the Americans
   fished out all the Japanese whales in the century before last.

