
                                                                   Landov

                                   Landov

   India's government is threatening to make companies hire more
   low-caste workers 


   A 23-YEAR-OLD dressed in white pyjama trousers and a black over-shirt
   represents two worlds in India that know almost nothing of each other.
   One is fast growing, but tiny: the world of business. Strolling
   through the Californian-style campus in Bangalore that serves as the
   headquarters of Infosys, a computer-services company, she grins and
   declares herself glad. Her brother, she adds shyly, is so proud that
   she is an "Infoscion".

   He is in the rural world where 70% of Indians reside: cultivating the
   family plot in Bannahalli Hundi, a village near Mysore. Life is less
   delightful there. Half the 4,000 population are brahmins, of the Hindu
   priestly caste. The rest, including the software engineer and her
   family, are dalits, members of a "scheduled caste" that was once
   considered untouchable.

   Sixty years on this is still the case in Bannahalli Hundi, says the
   young woman, who does not want to be named. She has never entered the
   house of a brahmin neighbour. When a dalit was recently hired to cook
   at the village school, brahmins withdrew their children. Has there
   been no weakening of caste strictures in her lifetime? "I have not
   seen it," she says.

   The tale is in startling contrast to Infosys's modernity, and she is
   embarrassed by it. But it partly explains how she came to be hired by
   a company that is considered to be one of India's best. She is the
   beneficiary of a charitable training scheme for dalit
   university-leavers that Infosys launched last year.

   In collaboration with the elite Bangalore-based International
   Institute of Information Technology (IIIT), Infosys is providing
   special training to low-caste engineering graduates who have failed to
   get a job in its industry. The training, which lasts seven months,
   does not promise employment. But of the 89 who completed the first
   course in May, all but four have found jobs. Infosys hired 17.

   The charity was born of a threat. India's Congress-led government has
   told companies to hire more dalits and members of tribal communities.
   Together these groups represent around a quarter of India's population
   and half of its poor. Manmohan Singh, the prime minister, has given
   warning that "strong measures" will be taken if companies do not
   comply. Many interpret that to mean the government will impose
   caste-based hiring quotas.

   Quotas already apply in education and government, where since 1950
   22.5% of university places and government jobs have been "reserved"
   for dalits and tribal people. In addition, since 1993, 27% of
   government jobs have been reserved for members of the Other Backward
   Classes (OBCs)--castes only slightly higher up the Hindu hierarchy.

   Promoting the wretched

   This is not enough for supporters of reservations. Since the
   introduction of liberal reforms in the early 1990s, public-sector
   hiring has slowed and businesses have boomed. Extending reservations
   to companies, they argue, would therefore safeguard an existing policy
   of promoting the Hindu wretched. It would almost certainly require
   changes to the constitution. But low-caste politicians are delighted
   by the prospect, so it could happen.

   The chief minister of Uttar Pradesh, a dalit leader called Mayawati,
   has said 30% of company jobs should be reserved for dalits, members of
   the OBCs and high-caste and Muslim poor. Chandra Bhan Prasad, a dalit
   journalist, applauds this and argues that it would be in the interest
   of companies. "It is in the culture of dalits that they are least
   likely to change their employment because they are so loyal to their
   masters," he says. It would also help them become a "new caste [sic]
   of consumers".

   Businessmen are unconvinced. Government, in both its intrusiveness and
   its incompetence, is a hindrance to them. Caste-based hiring quotas
   would be just another burden. People given a right to a job tend not
   to work very hard. So, in an effort to avert Mr Singh's threat, many
   companies and organisations that represent them are launching their
   own affirmative-action schemes.

   The Confederation of Indian Industry has introduced a package of
   dalit-friendly measures, including scholarships for bright low-caste
   students. The Federation of Indian Chambers of Commerce and Industry
   plans to support entrepreneurs in India's poorest districts.
   [4]Naukri.com, India's biggest online recruitment service, with over
   10m subscribers, anticipates that companies will soon actively seek
   low-caste recruits. It has therefore started asking job-seekers to
   register their caste.

   Basic training

   Infosys's training scheme, as described by S. Sadagopan, the IIIT'S
   director, is a Pygmalion undertaking. Meeting the parents of his dalit
   students, he saw "almost an anger in their eyes". For the first month
   the students were unresponsive. Their English was dismal. Mr Sadagopan
   felt compelled to introduce lessons in self-presentation, including
   table manners.

   Matters improved. The course was based on Infosys's 16-week basic
   training, which 31,000 Indian graduates underwent last year. The
   low-caste lot scored similar marks and gained confidence. At a bonding
   session, filled with meditation and dancing, they wrote themselves a
   slogan: "As good as any, better than many".

   It is a moving story. But Mr Sadagopan's students were not all that
   deprived. In the words of three, now working for Infosys, they were
   "normal middle-class Indians". A third of them were the sons and
   daughters of professionals. The worst had grades only a little below
   what Infosys routinely demands of its recruits. Almost all were from
   urban areas, where caste discrimination is rare.

   One of them, Manjunath, says the only time he was ever reminded of his
   low caste was when he applied for a place at university. Had it not
   been reserved for him, he says, he might have worked a bit harder--and
   so joined Infosys without any special help. As for his colleague from
   Bannahalli Hundi, coming from one of the richer families in the
   village, she is its first female university graduate--of any caste.

   The most that can be said for Infosys's programme--without devaluing
   Mr Sadagopan's efforts--is that it is a great opportunity for a tiny
   number of middle-class Indians, who happen also to be low-caste. The
   same would be true of caste-based reservations. This is because the
   percentage of India's workforce employed in the "organised" private
   sector (made up of firms that declare they have ten or more
   employees), where reservations might be applied, is also tiny: around
   2%. And as far as anyone can tell (companies do not ask the caste of
   their employees), members of low castes are already well represented
   in low-skilled jobs there. Much of India's heavy industry, such as
   steelmaking, is located where the low-caste population is high. Tata
   Steel, which employs around 40,000 people in India, has its main
   operations in Jamshedpur, in the eastern "tribal belt".

   Membership of a caste, as of a guild or a church, provides businessmen
   with a useful network. In the informal economy, where banks fear to
   tread, caste bonds tend to be affirmed through business. The fact that
   most Indian companies are family-owned exaggerates this: to prevent
   wealth being diluted, it encourages marriages not only within the same
   caste, but also within the same family. A sugar baroness of south
   India's kamma caste, Rajshree Pathy, recently explained this practice
   to an Indian newspaper, the Business Standard: "The PSG family
   produces girls, the Lakshmi Mills family produces boys, they marry
   each other and live happily ever after."

   The modernisation of India's economy has brought more dynamic change.
   Among educated, urban Indians caste identity is fading. Inter-caste
   marriages are increasing. According to [5]Jeevansathi.com, a
   matchmaking (or, as Indians say, "matrimonial") website, 58% of its
   online matches involved inter-caste couples. Meanwhile, in rural
   India--where unions are not fixed online--intra-caste marriages remain
   the norm.

   Business has to some degree been a laggard in this process. Caste
   bonds rooted in expediency, not tradition, allow businessmen to borrow
   and lend money with a degree of accountability, which helps to
   minimise risk. They are not an affirmation of a vocational hierarchy
   within the Hindu universe. Nonetheless, in north India, where business
   is to this day dominated by members of ancient trading castes, like
   marwaris (whose famous names include Birla, Bajaj and Mittal) and
   bania (Ambani), it can look pretty traditional.

   Rites of passage

   Harish Damodaran investigated the caste origins of many of India's
   industrialists in a forthcoming book[6]*. He identified three main
   trends. The first, which he calls a "bazaar to factory" route, is the
   passage of hereditary traders into industry. In northern India, some
   castes' monopolies have discouraged them from leaving their
   traditionally prescribed employment. So members of north India's
   farming castes--for example, jats and yadavs--rarely own a sugar or
   flour mill.

   The second trend, "office to factory", describes a recent movement of
   well-educated high-caste Hindus, including brahmins, into business.
   Lacking capital, these sophisticates tended to enter the services
   sector, where start-up costs are relatively low. India's world-class
   computer-services industry, including companies like Infosys, is the
   result.

   The third trajectory, "field to factory", is the transition into the
   business world of members of India's middle and lower-peasant castes.
   This must be the path of India's dalits, too. But they have not
   trodden it yet: across India, Mr Damodaran could not find a
   significant dalit industrialist.

   There is no strong evidence that companies discriminate against
   low-caste job applicants. Upper-class Indians, who tend also to be
   high-caste Hindus, can be disparaging about their low-caste
   compatriots. "Once a thicky, always a thicky," is how a rich
   businessman describes Ms Mayawati. Yet this at least partly reflects
   the fact that low-caste Hindus tend also to be low class; and in
   India, as in many countries, class prejudice is profound.

   There is, on the other hand, plenty of evidence that few able
   low-caste graduates are emerging from India's universities. Since it
   began registering the caste of its subscribers--almost by definition
   computer-literate and English-speaking--[7]Naukri.com has added 38,000
   young dalit and tribal job-seekers to its books. That represents 1% of
   the total who have registered in that time.

   For reservationists, this confirms the need for quotas. Others
   interpret the facts differently: reservations don't seem to work. And
   statistics support this view. Reservations notwithstanding, low-caste
   Indians are getting less poor at almost the same rate as the general
   population. Between 1983 and 2004, their spending power increased by
   26.7%, compared with 27.7% for the average Indian, according to the
   National Sample Survey Organisation, a government body.

   Low-caste students struggle in schools without special help, which is
   rarely available. Their English--the language of India's middle
   class--tends to be poor. Many drop out. Up to half of university
   places reserved for low-caste students are left vacant. So, too, are
   many of the university posts reserved for low-caste teachers. Most
   Indians emerge from this system with an abysmal education. Low-caste
   Indians perhaps almost invariably do.

   A measure of this fiasco can be found at the political-science
   department of one of India's prestigious post-graduate universities.
   Each year it chooses 50 students, from 1,500 applications, for its
   master's degree. Successful applicants will average no less than 55%
   in their undergraduate exams. Dalit applicants scrape in with as
   little as 30%. Nonetheless, practically every student will be awarded
   a first-class degree.

   India is failing to equip its young, of whatever caste or religion,
   with the skills that its companies need. This is one of the biggest
   threats to sustaining high economic growth. India's outstanding
   computer-services companies--which will account for around a quarter
   of overall growth in the next few years--intend to hire over 1m
   engineering graduates in the next two years. It will be tough. To
   recruit 31,000 graduates last year, Infosys considered 1.3m
   applicants; only 65,000 passed a basic test. To address the skills
   shortage, the company is investing a whopping $450m in training. "We
   are building India's human resources," says Mohandas Pai, Infosys's
   chief of human resources.

   Alas, reservationists have other concerns. Caste politics are
   pervasive. On August 28th the Supreme Court struck down an effort by
   Andhra Pradesh's government to reserve 4% of government jobs and
   education places for poor Muslims. The court is meanwhile weighing a
   more dramatic measure announced by the government last year: to
   reserve 27% of university places for the OBCs. To placate irate
   students, many of them high-caste, the government promises to increase
   the number of university places accordingly. Education standards would
   no doubt fall further.

   Even so, the policy may be unstoppable. Since reservations for the
   OBCs were introduced in the early 1990s the rise of political parties
   dedicated to these groups has been inexorable. So has the
   proliferation of the OBCs, to around 3,000 castes. They include
   millions who are not poor at all.

   "A massive deliberate confusion" is how Surjit Bhalla, an economist at
   Oxus Investments, a hedge fund, characterises reservations for the
   OBCs. When they were awarded reservations, the OBCs were estimated to
   make up 53% of India's total population. More recent counting suggests
   they are only about one-third of the population, although their 27%
   reservation remains unchanged. Moreover, by most measures, the average
   OBC member is no poorer than the average Indian. "How can you
   discriminate against the average?" asks Mr Bhalla, despairingly.

   There by mistake

   And despair he may. Practically no politician dares speak out against
   this caste-based racket for fear of being labelled an apologist for
   the caste system. Rather like guests at the Hotel California, those
   that join the list never leave--even one or two castes that were
   allegedly included by mistake. The surpassing example is Tamil Nadu,
   which reserves a total of 69% of government jobs: 1% for tribal
   people, 18% for dalits, 30% for the OBCs and 20% for a subset of
   them--members of castes once categorised by British colonisers as
   "criminal tribes" and now known more delicately as "de-notified
   communities".

   There is little opposition to this policy in Tamil Nadu, for two
   reasons. It is one of India's more literate and prosperous states. And
   low-caste Hindus are unusually prominent in Tamil Nadu, which suggests
   to reservationists that the policy is working well. Textiles companies
   in Tirupur, a T-shirt hub, for example, are mostly owned by gounders,
   members of a peasant caste that is officially listed as an OBC.

   One defender of the policy is N. Vasudevan, chief official of the
   Kafkaesque vision of bureaucratic hell that is the Backward Classes,
   Most Backward Classes and Minorities Welfare Department in Chennai,
   where workers languish behind mountains of never-opened files. Asked
   when it might end he replies: "When everyone becomes equal."

   There is an alternative view: that Tamil Nadu is more equal than most
   states not because it has lots of reservations but because, overall,
   it has been run less badly. It has therefore delivered above-average
   economic growth, from which low-caste Tamils have benefited.

   In addition, low-caste businessmen in Tamil Nadu have had
   opportunities that have nothing to do with government policy. In
   contrast to north India, where commerce is dominated by members of a
   few business castes, south India's business community has been more
   open to members of non-business castes. According to Raman Mahadevan,
   a business historian, this is partly because members of the south's
   main trading caste, the chettiars, chose to concentrate their
   investments outside India during the 19th century, in Malaya and
   Singapore.

   Partly as a result, little large-scale industry emerged in southern
   India until the 1930s. Around the same time, a popular movement
   against brahmins--especially lordly in the south--emboldened members
   of the lower and middle castes, including gounders, who were quick to
   convert their new assertiveness into business.

   The Hindu caste system has never been rigid. Low-caste Hindus do not
   accept their lumpen position in the hierarchy. Indeed, like
   middle-class English families, they tend to cherish a myth of their
   former greatness. By imitating the habits of a more prestigious
   neighbour, in dress or ritual, some low castes have sneaked a rung or
   two up the ladder. More recently, in an effort to be classified as an
   OBC or a dalit caste, some middle-ranking castes have tried to climb a
   rung or two down.

   Meanwhile, on the lowest rung of the ladder, dalit businessmen can be
   found operating in the informal economy, perhaps as small traders.
   They must be especially reliant on caste as a business network. But
   that reliance will change if they can expand into the organised
   sector. Where businessmen can gain access to credit without having to
   claim kinship, caste affiliations wither. As Mr Damodaran writes: "A
   kamma sugar magnate ultimately identifies his interests with other
   mill-owners and not with fellow kamma cane growers or workers." And
   his business may flourish, unfettered.
   [gray.gif]

   * "India's New Capitalists: Caste, Business and Industry in a Modern
   Nation-State." By Harish Damodaran. Permanent Black/Palgrave
   Macmillan.

