
   Government and opposition limber up for March's presidential poll


   WITH the new year, election season has arrived in Taiwan.
   Parliamentary and presidential elections loom in the next three
   months. As always, the government in Beijing will be watching keenly.
   The first contest, on January 12th, is for Taiwan's legislature. The
   opposition Nationalist Party, the Kuomintang (KMT), which favours
   better relations with the mainland, is expected to retain its
   majority.

   The KMT hopes a decisive victory will give it momentum for the big
   prize, the presidency, to be decided on March 22nd. Ousted in 2000
   after five decades in power, the KMT is desperate to win it back. Its
   hopes were raised on December 28th when a court rejected an appeal
   against the acquittal on corruption charges of Ma Ying-jeou, the
   party's former chairman. This cleared him to contest the presidency.

   The ruling Democratic Progressive Party (DPP), on the other hand, is
   planning to use its expected defeat to argue against a concentration
   of power in KMT hands. Its presidential candidate, Frank Hsieh, will
   remind voters of the authoritarianism that marked KMT rule in the 20th
   century.

   Turnout may be no more than 60%, low by Taiwan's standards. Years of
   political mudslinging between the big parties have brought
   disillusionment and apathy. And unfamiliarity with a new electoral
   system may also deter voters. Taiwan has adopted a "single-seat, dual
   vote" system similar to those used in Japan and Germany. Voters will
   choose one direct representative per constituency and a preferred
   party to provide "at-large" members of parliament. There are 113
   seats, of which 73 are directly elected, 34 at-large and six reserved
   for aboriginal candidates. The KMT is expected to win 60-65 seats, the
   DPP 35-45.

   In 2005 the constitution was amended to halve the size of the
   legislature. The idea was to make it less chaotic and prone to
   fisticuffs. But the new rules are likely to result in a body stacked
   with local powerbrokers who care little about national policy.
   Intending to break the two-party dominance of Taiwan's
   rough-and-tumble political system, Lee Teng-hui, a former president,
   has urged voters to opt for minority parties. He even hopes the
   emergence of a third force in local politics could produce another
   presidential candidate.

                                                                      AFP

                                    AFP

                  Read her nails: Ma Ying-jeou is innocent

   The legislative-election campaign has been dominated by two issues.
   One is the DPP's drive to expunge from Taiwan symbols of Chiang
   Kai-shek, the KMT leader, who led its retreat from mainland China in
   1949. This week, the Chiang Kai-shek memorial hall in Taipei reopened
   as a "democracy memorial", highlighting the human-rights abuses of his
   regime.

   Second is a procedural dispute over two referendums to be held with
   the election. One, initiated by the DPP, relates to the KMT's "stolen
   assets". The other, introduced by the KMT, which this week
   nevertheless called a boycott of both referendums, covers alleged
   corruption by the DPP and President Chen Shui-bian.

   More important for the DPP than the issues themselves is the chance to
   settle procedures for yet another referendum, to be held at the same
   time as the presidential election. It will ask whether Taiwan should
   apply for membership of the United Nations using the name "Taiwan"
   rather than its antiquated formal title, "the Republic of China". This
   appeals to the DPP's core supporters, who see themselves as Taiwanese,
   not Chinese. So it is a device both to win votes and raise turnout.
   But it alarms China, which sees it as a step towards a formal
   declaration of Taiwan's independence--an event China has said could
   provoke an invasion. So China, as usual, will be rooting for the KMT.
   In Taiwan, that is not an advantage.

