
   Like father, like son


   IN JAPAN'S dynastic politics, even foreign policy is a family
   business. The most recent prime minister, Shinzo Abe, was the grandson
   of one prime minister; the incumbent, Yasuo Fukuda, is the first prime
   minister to follow his father's footsteps into office.

   The hawkish Mr Abe indulged in occasional revisionism over Japan's
   rapine wartime past and espoused a sweeping "arc of freedom and
   prosperity" that was supposed to anchor Japan in a Eurasian community
   of democratic nations but was in practice a not-particularly-subtle
   attempt to throw a cordon around a rising China. Though the arc
   languishes as official policy on the foreign ministry's [4]website, it
   has in practice been abandoned by Mr Abe's successor.

   Thirty years ago Mr Fukuda senior went to Manila and promised
   South-East Asia that Japan had forever renounced aggression against
   its neighbours, and would do everything to build confidence and mutual
   respect. This became known as the Fukuda doctrine. In the practice of
   it, Mr Fukuda père opened diplomatic relations with China. Now, Mr
   Fukuda fils is proving a chip off the old block.

   Late last month at the 16-country East Asia Summit in Singapore, the
   younger Mr Fukuda looked singularly at ease schmoozing with Asia's
   leaders, most of whom say they value discretion over confrontation. In
   effect, he assured them that the Fukuda doctrine was alive and well.
   Though there is no question of Japan abandoning its 60-year alliance
   with the United States (and neighbours would no doubt be horrified if
   it did), Mr Fukuda assured them that he would follow a more
   "Asia-focused" policy.

   China, in particular, has taken notice. Its leaders have not forgotten
   the father, and the stripling 71-year-old son will get a warm welcome
   on a first official trip to Beijing in late December or early January.
   Where Mr Abe used bluntly to bring up China's human-rights record and
   its lack of military transparency, people who know Mr Fukuda say that
   there is no question of his raising such indelicate issues with the
   Chinese. As an early seasonal gift, his government last month refused
   to meet the Dalai Lama, who was on a visit to Japan, explaining that
   the Tibetan leader was not "important" enough.

   The upshot is that traditionally strained relations between Japan and
   China look set for a sharp improvement. President Hu Jintao will visit
   Japan in the spring, and is likely to be invited as a guest to the G8
   summit to be held in early July in Hokkaido, in northern Japan.
   Climate change will top the summit's agenda, and China's pollution
   record will draw flak, as will its human-rights record soon after,
   during Beijing's Olympics. Mr Hu will look to Mr Fukuda--if he is
   indeed still prime minister--to provide friendly covering fire on both
   counts. The last thing China wants to do in the coming months is
   undermine Japan's prime minister, and this will help Mr Fukuda, with a
   minimum of effort, to rise above his domestic problems and look every
   inch the statesman.

