
   Forget the national interest, Japan's parties are locked in a tactical
   fight

   [3]Japan's politics

   THE saga that has brought politics in Japan to a halt is nearing its
   crisis. In July the Democratic Party of Japan (DPJ) won control of the
   upper house of the Diet (parliament) from the Liberal Democratic Party
   (LDP), which still controls the lower house and governs in coalition
   with New Komeito, a junior partner. Unlike counterparts in many
   democracies, Japan's upper house has formidable powers. The
   constitution never envisaged a split parliament, with the upper house
   able to veto nearly every government bill. The government could
   overrule a veto with its two-thirds' majority in the lower house. Yet
   this weapon has not been used in 50 years, and may backfire,
   particularly if the public deems its use unwarranted.

   This week the upper house began deliberating a bill passed last month
   that would send the Japanese navy back to the Indian Ocean to provide
   fuel to American-led operations in Afghanistan. Hardly central to the
   "war on terror", the mission was still the most visible proof that
   Japan was showing the flag. But it was hurriedly recalled on November
   1st, when the DPJ refused to allow an extension to its mandate.

   Internationalists in both parties are embarrassed that Japan, yet
   again, appears weak-kneed over its international responsibilities.
   Nevertheless the DPJ's leader, Ichiro Ozawa, is playing hardball. He
   vows to oppose the bill, despite dissent even within his own party.
   His predecessor as leader, Seiji Maehara, says that to rely on a
   United Nations mandate to send the army abroad, as Mr Ozawa insists
   Japan should, "is to give Russia and China power of veto over Japan's
   foreign policy."

   Now comes an intense tactical game, which Yasuo Fukuda, prime minister
   since September, must win to hang on in power. Mr Fukuda has already
   extended the Diet's current extraordinary session once, until December
   15th, so that the refuelling bill can be deliberated in the upper
   house. But that is not enough time. He might have been tempted to let
   the bill lapse. He does not believe Japan should join every
   American-led "coalition of the willing". Besides, in early November he
   held private talks with Mr Ozawa about forging a "grand coalition",
   for which he might have jettisoned the bill. Yet Mr Ozawa's complicity
   shocked his party's executive. He resigned as DPJ leader, but was
   hurriedly reinstated for lack of an alternative.

   Mr Fukuda has since been to Washington, DC, where he assured Mr Bush
   he would make every effort to send the ships back to the Indian Ocean.
   With honour at stake, the prime minister will probably extend the Diet
   session one last time, waiting for the upper house either to reject
   the refuelling bill or to sit on it for a full 60 days, which amounts
   to the same thing. He will then try to ram the bill into law using the
   coalition's supermajority, and the upper house will probably condemn
   the government with a motion of no confidence.

   Until recently, such a motion was thought dramatic enough to have the
   prime minister dissolve the government and call a general election.
   But the game is fast changing. For a start, though no fervent public
   support exists for the refuelling mission, there is no passionate
   opposition. And despite a growing defence-procurement scandal, the DPJ
   has failed to implicate LDP politicians--even Fukushiro Nukaga, now
   finance minister, to whom scandals usually stick like a faithful dog.
   Lastly, not everyone in the DPJ really wants a snap election. Though
   the party is certain to pick up seats, DPJ candidates have yet to be
   selected for many districts, and even then only a miracle would grant
   the party a lower-house victory. The odds are rising that Mr Fukuda
   might shake off the upper-house censure, explain to the country that
   he tried his best to secure co-operation, and continue as prime
   minister.

   If so, the refuelling saga will prove a mere skirmish before real
   battle is joined over next year's budget and the livelihood issues
   that ordinary Japanese care about-- at a time, Sadakazu Tanigaki, the
   LDP's policy chief, points out, of a soft economy at home and a
   darkening economic outlook abroad. The Diet's ordinary session will
   open in January, and the government must pass a budget before the
   fiscal year beginning on April 1st. Though the lower house can do that
   alone, the upper house must also approve a raft of bills required if
   the budget deficit is to be financed and government salaries and
   contracts paid.

   Again, Mr Fukuda will present himself as a model of reasonableness,
   listening to opposition demands to boost welfare and tackle regional
   inequalities. Yet meeting such demands would bust the budget. And
   there will be pressure to pass bills swiftly. Perhaps talk of a grand
   coalition will resurface. More likely, a budget clash will loom, and
   Mr Fukuda will use the supermajority once again, this time to keep the
   government running. If the public blamed him for the confrontation, Mr
   Fukuda might then feel the need to dissolve the government. Mr Fukuda
   intends to prove he can be more than a stopgap "caretaker" prime
   minister. But most lower-house politicians expect an election as early
   as April, and many have run up their campaign posters in readiness for
   a January snap election--just in case.

