
   Golly: the Dear Leader won't come clean about his bombs 


   ANOTHER deadline, another disappointment. Last February North Korea
   agreed with four of its neighbours and the United States to give up
   its ambitions as a nuclear power in return for lashings of aid and
   rehabilitation from its standing as an international pariah. Crucial
   to the deal was North Korea's subsequent promise to declare all its
   nuclear activities by December 31st. The deadline came. It went. From
   Pyongyang, not a squeak.

   Though hardly out of keeping for such a secretive, recalcitrant
   regime, the silence has generated unease, even embarrassment, among
   North Korea's counterparts in the six-party talks hosted by China,
   which, typically, described the hold-up as "natural". But the
   administration of President George Bush reversed a once hostile policy
   in the past year in an attempt to prove that engagement with North
   Korea, even after it let off a nuclear bomb, could work. America's
   patience will have limits.

   For now it will not sound the alarm. After all, an earlier part of the
   deal, the closure of the Soviet-era nuclear reactor at Yongbyon in
   July, came three months later than promised. Since then American
   inspectors have moved into Yongbyon to see that it is disabled and
   eventually dismantled. December 31st was also meant to be the deadline
   for Yongbyon's disablement, which was missed as well. But this week
   America was at pains to stress North Korean technical co-operation. If
   anything, it said, the delay was because of its own insistence that
   due care be taken in removing the thousands of fuel rods from the
   ageing reactor.

   A few weeks' delay in the declaration of North Korea's nuclear
   programmes would be tolerable. Any longer and the six-party process
   would be in trouble. For the nuclear programmes are the crux of the
   matter. Declaring them was never going to come easily to Kim Jong Il,
   North Korea's "Dear Leader". His nuclear weapons, however few and
   feeble, provide his only leverage against the world. Yet America is
   unlikely to stand for any bluff--not least because of suspicions that
   a Syrian site bombed by Israel in September was a nuclear facility
   that had North Korean help.

   The questions now are not only how much plutonium North Korea has
   extracted and how many warheads it has made. The Bush administration
   also wants to know the scale of the programme to enrich uranium to
   which North Korea admitted in 2002. Earlier claims by America about
   its scale seem exaggerated; still, it has evidence that Pakistan's
   nuclear racketeer, Abdul Qadeer Khan (see [4]article), sold the North
   uranium-enriching gear.

   Hitherto, those in the six-party talks have given North Korea the
   benefit of the doubt: only Japan has been openly sceptical about the
   North's sincerity--at least until it has come clean about the Japanese
   kidnapped by the regime in the 1970s and 1980s. Now Mr Kim may face a
   hardening of the ranks. However badly Mr Bush needs a foreign-policy
   success, he will not move towards normalising relations with North
   Korea before nuclear progress. As for South Korea, President Roh
   Moo-hyun has until now seen no evil; yet even his foreign minister now
   admits that dealing with a nuclear North Korea is a Sisyphean task.
   What is more, Mr Roh steps down next month and his conservative
   successor, Lee Myung-bak, is no fan of "sunshine diplomacy". He
   promotes a harder line to the North: aid and investment from Seoul
   should follow nuclear disablement.

   Mr Kim may yet come clean on his programmes, and denuclearisation
   continue apace. If he doesn't, it is not obvious what the world can do
   about it.

