
   Beijing blocks open elections in Hong Kong until at least 2017


   TO DIM the impact of what it had to know would be unpopular news,
   China's government waited until the Saturday evening of the New Year's
   weekend to reveal its long-awaited reaction to Hong Kong's petition
   for a democratic government. The answer came in two forms. There was a
   long, muddled, pledge that appeared to honour the request by setting a
   timetable for a direct popular election for the territory's "chief
   executive". And there was a tough underlying message: no such election
   until two more five-year chief-executive terms have been completed,
   ie, until 2017, if then; and all candidates will have to be approved
   by the central government. Democracy, in short, only in name.
   Similarly, it will not be until 2020, at the earliest, that Hong
   Kong's citizens will have the right to elect directly all the members
   of the city's legislature.

   The decision follows a lengthy study by the Hong Kong government and,
   no doubt, lengthy consideration in Beijing. Local opinion polls show
   huge support among Hong Kong citizens for democracy. A recent
   by-election for one of the directly elected seats in the legislature
   resulted in a symbolically important victory for a pro-democracy
   candidate, Anson Chan, the territory's most senior civil servant
   during the handover from British rule a decade ago. But the Chinese
   government and its supporters have recently taken an increasingly
   chauvinistic line. Pro-mainland papers hammered Mrs Chan. A mild
   opinion piece by a long-time democracy advocate, Martin Lee, in the
   Wall Street Journal, urging countries to push for human rights during
   the Beijing Olympics later this year, led to his being pilloried in
   terms reminiscent of the Cultural Revolution: "Traitor Lee!"; "Running
   dog!"

   In protest at China's electoral timetable, there was a lightly
   attended bicycle rally on January 1st. A bigger rally is planned for
   January 13th. But it is unlikely that the turnout will match the
   hundreds of thousands who protested in 2003 against proposed
   restrictions on civil liberties. At the time, SARS, a respiratory
   disease, was raging, the economy was in a funk and discontent
   widespread. Now, times are good. Restaurants are packed and
   unemployment low. The present chief executive, Donald Tsang, was
   installed by China in 2005 and so bears the burden of being a puppet.
   But he is respected as a capable administrator and would have won
   re-election in a popular election in 2007 if one had been held. To
   some extent, mollifying China is considered part of the job.

   Now Mr Tsang will have to come up with an electoral plan for the
   coming years that will placate public impatience but not alarm China.
   This may not be possible. So he has given warning that heated argument
   might jeopardise Hong Kong's "stability and development". This threat
   is not taken lightly. The city prides itself on functioning
   efficiently in an often chaotic continent. Of course, the best way to
   ensure continued stability would be to let the people of Hong Kong run
   their own city. But Beijing is loth to let democracy take root in this
   "Special Administrative Region" lest it sets a precedent elsewhere in
   China.

