
                                                                       AP

                                     AP

   Amid a worrying surge in Islamic militancy, a fight between rival
   radicals may not be the good news Pakistan says it is


   IN PAKISTAN, more alarmingly even than usual, the flag of jihad is
   fluttering and extremists are marching on the state. Of several
   concurrent--partly co-ordinated--dramas involving Islamist militants,
   the bloodiest is in South Waziristan, a semi-autonomous tribal region
   on Pakistan's north-western frontier. In three weeks of high-altitude
   battle there between local Taliban and foreign--mostly
   Uzbek--Islamists, more than 250 foreigners are reported to have been
   killed. The army, which has failed to clear the foreigners from South
   Waziristan in four years of trying, announced on April 9th that the
   Talibs had done so. Yet quite why this fight began, whether it has
   ended, and what it means for Pakistan and the broader "war on terror"
   all remain unclear.

   A less obscure struggle was launched in Islamabad on April 6th by a
   mullah named Abdul Aziz. He gave the government a month to close the
   capital's brothels and music shops, and tear down advertisements
   depicting women. He also declared sharia law within the high walls of
   his mosque and the adjoining madrassa. If the government were to
   respond with force, he promised it suicide-bombings. After hearing
   this sermon, Mr Aziz's followers, allegedly more than 10,000 bearded
   males and burqa-clad females, set fire in the street to a pyre of
   music videos and CDs extracted from local traders. The mosque, Lal
   Masjid, on the roof of which these young zealots can be seen
   practising martial moves with staves, is barely a mile from Pakistan's
   supreme court, parliament building and the headquarters of the
   Inter-Services Intelligence Agency (ISI).

   For much of Pakistan's history, the ISI, the army's main spying
   outfit, has mobilised Islamists to fight its wars, in Afghanistan,
   Kashmir and elsewhere. This was consistent with a broader policy,
   pursued by successive--especially military--governments, of pandering
   to Islamists. Because it had made common cause with the fanatics, the
   army thought it could control them. If this were ever true, it is not
   now.

   On March 29th a suicide-bomber killed one soldier and mutilated
   several others in an army compound in Kharian, 160km (100 miles)
   south-east of Islamabad. Two days earlier, five ISI officers were
   killed in a grenade attack in Bajaur, another of the seven tribal
   agencies (see map). The suicide blast was the eighth this year,
   including two in Islamabad, and all, says a senior intelligence
   official, were linked to militants in Waziristan.

   The violence comes at a bad time for General Pervez Musharraf,
   Pakistan's uniformed president. Over the past month, he has faced
   rowdy strikes and protests from the country's black-coated lawyers,
   over a crude attempt to sack the country's top judge--an attempt,
   allege his opponents, to make sure any constitutional shenanigans
   escape judicial censure. In an election year these civilian opponents,
   whom the general has outwitted for a decade, scent blood. Two exiled
   leaders, Benazir Bhutto and Nawaz Sharif, are rallying their followers
   to the lawyers' protests. In all the fuss, sectarian bloodletting last
   week in Kurram, another tribal agency, barely merited a mention in the
   nation's press. Only 40 Sunnis and Shias were reported killed.

   Not much more attention--in Pakistan at least--was paid to one of the
   first judgments of Mr Aziz's new sharia court--a fatwa issued on April
   8th calling for the sacking and punishment of the tourism minister,
   Nilofar Bakhtiar. Her alleged crime was to have received an elated hug
   (a restrained pat on the back, she says) from a French paraglider
   after the pair completed a glide together in Paris. Besides promoting
   Pakistan as an ideal tourist destination, Ms Bakhtiar's stunt was
   supposed to draw attention to the plight of children orphaned by the
   earthquake in Kashmir and North-West Frontier Province (NWFP) in
   October 2005. Many, incidentally, are reported to have been taken in
   by madrassas such as Mr Aziz's.

   Amid all this distressing news, the government is striving to present
   the fighting in South Waziristan as something positive. It describes
   it as local tribes recoiling against al-Qaeda-type militants in their
   midst. There may be some truth in this. But it is hard to celebrate a
   war that appears to have cemented the authority of a Taliban militia,
   modelled on Mullah Omar's Afghan original--over a swathe of the
   strategic border region, from which its fighters launch attacks on
   American and NATO troops in neighbouring Afghanistan.

   At the least, the fighting may signal a definitive end to the army's
   own effort to purge the foreign militants. It has deployed 80,000
   troops to the tribal areas, of whom some 700 have been killed. Seen
   locally as an invading army, this has inspired fanatical resistance,
   undermined the civil administration in Waziristan, and helped spread
   Taliban rule outside the tribal areas and into the NWFP itself. In the
   districts of Tank and Bannu, police posts have been abandoned and
   barbers sent packing. In another district, Malakand, a militant leader
   named Fazalullah, the son-in-law of a chieftain who sent thousands to
   Afghanistan to fight for the Taliban against America and its allies in
   2001, is reported to be wandering on horseback, delivering Taliban
   edicts through a megaphone.

   The army advanced into the tribal areas--for the first time in
   Pakistan's history--soon after America's 2001 invasion of Afghanistan.
   Coming the other way, thousands of Taliban and the foreign jihadists
   they had sheltered fled the superpower's bombs. It was a natural
   sanctuary. The Taliban were mostly Pushtuns, an ethnic group
   straddling the border, and included many Pakistanis, mostly from the
   tribal areas, and of these especially Wazirs.

   This was partly a result of the ISI's support for the Taliban, and its
   ability to manipulate the Wazirs, who, with a predilection for jihad
   and a history of raiding Afghanistan, were not unwilling tools.
   Indeed, the pitiful deprivation of the tribal areas left them few
   better options.

   Pakistan's normal writ does not extend to these areas; neither do its
   benefits. They are governed according to a British colonial model by a
   powerful bureaucrat called the political agent, who reports to the
   president. Acting through local elders, called maliks, the agent's
   single main charge is to keep the tribes in check. To that end, he can
   levy harsh collective punishments, such as demolishing houses or
   imprisoning women and children. Wazirs call these powers the "black
   laws". Interestingly, liberal Pakistanis refer to a raft of laws that
   discriminate against women and non-Muslims, introduced by General Zia
   ul-Haq, a former military dictator, Islamist and American ally, by the
   same name.

   In the wilderness

   So long as they do not upset the political agent, the tribes have been
   left to rule themselves--through jirgas, tribal councils, or, when
   they feel threatened and their jihadist blood is up, sharia courts.
   They are probably the most neglected Pakistanis. Waziristan has one
   hospital bed per 6,000 inhabitants, and a literacy rate of around 10%.
   More than 80% of males are educated in madrassas and girls not at all.
   Since 1997, residents of the tribal areas have been permitted to vote,
   but political parties may not campaign among them. Small wonder if
   they feel ambivalent towards Pakistan.

   The tribal areas were also a second home for foreign militants. Many,
   including Osama bin Laden, learned their trade there during the
   anti-Soviet jihad in the 1980s. Anecdotes suggest that 300 al-Qaeda
   fighters, mostly Arabs, survived the group's last stand at Tora Bora,
   on the Afghan side of the border, and fled into Kurram. About 130 were
   swiftly arrested. Of the remainder--often called "core
   al-Qaeda"--there has been little sign. A handful of mid-rankers has
   been picked off by the Pakistanis, including a couple in or around the
   tribal areas. Last year, when Abu Musab al-Zarqawi, boss of al-Qaeda's
   franchise in Iraq, was killed, a document retrieved from his hideout
   suggested the group's leaders were in Waziristan. But since 2001
   surprisingly few Arab jihadists have been encountered, willingly or
   otherwise, by Western soldiers in Afghanistan or by the Pakistanis
   next door.

   The foreigners fighting in Waziristan are mostly Uzbeks, mainly from a
   hapless militant group, the Islamic Movement of Uzbekistan, which was
   chased into Afghanistan in the late 1990s. Among them is said to be a
   handful of Uighurs from Xinjiang in China and Chechens--allegedly
   including the staff of the Chechen embassy to Afghanistan under the
   Taliban. A few members of this job lot of jihadists, estimated at
   between 800 and 5,000 fighters, are reported to have been settled in
   Waziristan since the 1980s. Others have come since 2001, according to
   a Pakistani intelligence official, who claims to have interviewed a
   woman trafficked from Uzbekistan to become a jihadist's wife.

   As the army fought its way into first South, then North, Waziristan in
   2003-05, the Uzbeks allied with the Wazir and Mahsud tribes against
   it. The alliance was forged principally by a charismatic Wazir
   commander, Nek Muhammad, a veteran of battles against the Soviet
   forces and with the Taliban against their Afghan enemies. A
   long-haired, wild-eyed warrior, a type common in Wazir history, Nek
   Muhammad was killed by the army in 2004. It had signed a treaty with
   him shortly before, in effect giving his Pakistani Taliban the run of
   South Waziristan. Nek Muhammad's five senior commanders and one or two
   rivals have since been jostling for command, executing criminals and
   launching attacks into Afghanistan.

   The latest fighting involving the Uzbeks is in part a product of this
   feuding. Two of the five commanders, who are all from the Wazir
   Yargulkhel tribe, have fought alongside the Uzbeks. They include Haji
   Omar, who until recently was considered Nek Muhammad's anointed
   successor. According to Brigadier Mahmood Shah, the army officer who
   drafted the deal with Nek Muhammad, Haji Omar's main weakness is a
   certain irascibility caused by a Soviet bullet lodged in his brain.
   This makes him a "wonky sort of chap". The rival side, including most
   of the Yargulkhel, is led by another Taliban commander named Muhammad
   Nazir. By kicking out the foreigners, Mr Nazir plainly hopes to emerge
   as Nek Muhammad's unrivalled successor.

   It would not be surprising if, as the government claims, Mr Nazir's
   campaign is popular. Wazirs are a xenophobic and conservative bunch.
   They are scandalised by some of their Uzbek guests, who drink alcohol,
   poach women, survive on banditry and are said to be loth to wage jihad
   in Afghanistan. The Uzbeks are also accused of the murder of 180
   maliks in South Waziristan, which was the final blow for the local
   administration.

   Talib v Talib

   To fight the Uzbeks, Mr Nazir has received support, allegedly
   including airstrikes and artillery, from the army. There are some
   indications that his alleged victory augurs well. For example, several
   top-level Afghan Taliban, including a son of Jalaluddin Haqqani, a
   noted outlaw, are reported to have tried and failed to arrange a truce
   in South Waziristan. But it is also possible that America, which
   covers the cost of Pakistan's operations in the tribal areas, has in
   fact been paying for Mr Nazir's Taliban to kill Uzbek militants
   because of their reluctance to kill American troops.

   If that were true, Pakistan would not mind unduly. Its priority is to
   wrest back a sort of control over the tribal areas. To that end, after
   the failure of its military operations, the government has in fact
   made several deals with the militants in a vain effort to buy their
   obedience. A pact in North Waziristan last September produced a
   similar result to that with Nek Muhammad. The militants rarely attack
   Pakistani troops there, partly because they are too busy pouring into
   Afghanistan. In February America's then top general in Afghanistan,
   Karl Eikenberry, claimed that cross-border attacks had risen threefold
   since that deal.

   The fighting between Mr Nazir and the Uzbeks might suggest that
   Pakistan has abandoned such mollifying tactics in favour of
   time-honoured divide-and-rule. That would bring short-term gains, at
   best. It will not roll back the Taliban. That vast task will probably
   require massive economic development of the tribal areas and their
   incorporation into the regular Pakistani state. Indeed this has always
   been official policy. But, as so often in Pakistan, it has been
   blocked by vested interests: the army, which saw the tribal areas as
   its adventurist playground; elite bureaucrats, who coveted appointment
   as political agents, sometimes allegedly as a chance to make corrupt
   fortunes from taxing smugglers; and the mullahs, who are said to
   control more than 3,000 madrassas in the NWFP, well financed by Gulf
   countries.

   In the absence of competition from the secular political parties,
   Islamic parties clean up the local vote in the tribal area. Typically,
   the government's chief negotiator with Mr Nazir is Fazlur Rahman, the
   Islamist leader of the parliamentary opposition. As so often, the
   general seems torn between unleashing reforms and falling prisoner to
   the vested interests. His instincts are for reform. Programmes to
   bring better health care and education to the tribal areas are already
   under way--America has contributed $38m to these since 2002 and
   promises more. Last year, moreover, a committee of Pushtun
   grandees--retired civil servants, judges and so forth--was told to
   find out what the tribals wanted. After holding jirgas across the
   tribal areas, these wise men reported that they wanted the black laws
   repealed, gradual recourse to the laws of the state and the same
   freedoms as other Pakistanis. For these sensible proposals General
   Musharraf has yet to show any enthusiasm.

