
   Fukuda braces for his biggest battle, over the annual budget

   [3]Japan's politics

   THE Diet, Japan's parliament, this week saw the end of one session, an
   extraordinary one in every sense, and the start of another that will
   be ordinary only in name. With the lower house held by his Liberal
   Democratic Party (LDP) and its allies, and the upper house in the
   hands of the opposition, Yasuo Fukuda, the prime minister, has an
   excruciating task in securing the passage of the annual budget.

   The extraordinary session was a consequence of the Democratic Party of
   Japan's victory in the upper-house elections last July. The DPJ's
   blunt leader, Ichiro Ozawa, vowed to oppose any extension of the
   navy's mission in the Indian Ocean, where it refuels allies' ships as
   part of NATO's war in Afghanistan. The government sees the mission as
   proof of Japan's global commitment; Mr Ozawa says it breaches the
   country's pacifist constitution.

   Mr Ozawa warned Mr Fukuda, who took over as a "caretaker" prime
   minister in September, that the unprecedented use of the LDP's
   supermajority in the lower house to override upper-house opposition to
   the refuelling mission would provoke a formal censure from the upper
   house. And that would surely bring a general election.

   Yet on January 11th, when the LDP used its supermajority to reinstate
   the mission, no censure followed. As for toppling the government, late
   last year Mr Ozawa held secret talks with Mr Fukuda on forming a
   "grand coalition", an action disowned by his party. If there is any
   logic to Mr Ozawa's climbdown, it is that the public is indifferent to
   the refuelling debate. Wages are stagnant and the future of social
   welfare uncertain: pocketbook matters count. A member of the shadow
   cabinet says the DPJ is holding its fire for the budget fight. With
   the economy and stockmarket stumbling, that offers the best chance of
   bringing down the government.

   A drama is certain. The annual budget needs simply to pass the lower
   house. But all sorts of supplementary bills need upper-house approval.
   If they do not get it, the ruling coalition could--at some political
   cost--use its supermajority again. However, procedural rules mean
   there is not enough time for that before the new fiscal year begins on
   April 1st. So government programmes might come to a halt, while tax
   uncertainties would harm investment.

   A big battle will be over the renewal of a petrol-tax surcharge, whose
   proceeds are earmarked for roads and such. If the opposition wills it,
   petrol will fall by ¥24 ($0.22) a litre on April 1st, and Mr Fukuda
   may be loth to anger consumers by forcing a price rise a few weeks
   later. But who cares about consumers? Most prefectural governments,
   including DPJ ones, want the surcharge, to lavish as pork on local
   building firms. Besides, stalling the budget for political ends could
   backfire on the opposition. And Mr Fukuda may not use his
   supermajority powers. Budget matters are not black-or-white, and Mr
   Fukuda is grey by nature. Compromises are possible.

   It is a conundrum for the opposition. Unusually, the opinion polls
   suggest the DPJ is more popular than the ruling coalition and, for all
   its internal divisions, it has little to lose from a general election.
   Yet the election is Mr Fukuda's to call, and he says he will not even
   think of one until he has hosted the G8 summit, in July.

   Most politicians now expect an election not in April but late in the
   summer. That assumes that Mr Fukuda will weather not just the budget
   fight, but also an almighty mess of lost records at the pensions
   agency and a defence-procurement scandal that looks about to claim a
   former defence minister, Fumio Kyuma.

   By the summer, though, Mr Fukuda, the "caretaker", may want to hang on
   longer. He is not bound to call an election until September 2009.
   Stability, of sorts, then. The price? Continued political chaos and
   none of the bold measures badly needed to set the economy on a firmer
   footing. In the meantime, as Tadamori Oshima, the LDP's Diet-affairs
   chairman, moans, "The world believes Japan's politicians are unable to
   decide on anything, not even to put one foot in front of the other."

