
   The devil in the nuclear detail


   AFTER 15 years of trying, the effort to prise North Korea out of the
   bomb-making business has just got encouragingly technical. A team of
   experts, led by America, started work on November 5th to disable three
   of North Korea's nuclear facilities at Yongbyon: the reactor, the
   nearby plant that fabricates natural uranium into fuel for the reactor
   core and the chemical reprocessing plant where bomb-usable plutonium
   is separated from the spent fuel-rods. The work should be finished by
   year's end, when North Korea is also supposed to have made a clean
   breast of other nefarious nuclear activities. Then talks among the six
   countries involved--including South Korea, Japan, China and
   Russia--can turn to dismantling Yongbyon, and to North Korea's
   promised disarmament.

   But will North Korea really give up the estimated 50kg (110lbs) of
   separated plutonium (enough for at least 6-8 bombs) it is thought to
   have squirrelled away? By getting down, literally, to nuts and bolts
   at Yongbyon, the six-party process has got a crucial step further
   towards that disarmament goal than previous efforts. Under a 1994 deal
   with the Clinton administration, North Korea agreed merely to freeze
   operations at Yongbyon, while America, South Korea and Japan laboured
   to build two Western-designed, less proliferation-prone reactors as a
   huge bribe. The deal fell apart in 2002, when America confronted North
   Korea with evidence of its cheating: a parallel effort to produce
   enriched uranium, another possible bomb ingredient.

   At six-party talks in February, North Korea accepted the equivalent of
   1m tonnes of heavy fuel-oil (some of it in other forms of energy
   assistance) for disabling Yongbyon. Once disabled, says America's
   chief negotiator, it would take North Korea at least a year to get the
   plutonium-producing reactor up and running again.

   Of course, with the nuclear stash he already has, North Korea's Kim
   Jong Il might not be fussed at such a delay. And much could go wrong
   from here. One difficulty lies in the six-party complexities. But
   other problems already loom.

   It was a badly-behaving North Korea--in October 2006 it conducted a
   provocative bomb test--that persuaded the other five to back tough
   sanctions, helping the February deal to fruition. Now nuclear progress
   brings its own worries.

   South Korea is straining to push through economic and other deals with
   North Korea, fearing that a speedy rapprochement between prickly Mr
   Kim and America will reduce its own leverage over the North. America
   worries that such generosity could weaken Mr Kim's incentive to stay
   on the nuclear straight and narrow. Japan, meanwhile, is anxious that
   America, in pursuit of nuclear progress, will remove North Korea from
   its terrorism blacklist before Mr Kim has come up with information
   Japan wants about its citizens abducted to North Korea in the past. It
   refuses to stump up towards energy aid, but may contribute to the
   disabling costs.

   North Korea, though, still has to produce its list of weapons
   programmes (to include any uranium dabbling). A first draft is
   expected shortly. George Bush has said it must also include nuclear
   assistance Mr Kim has given to others. Some nuclear material was
   discovered in Libya several years ago of possible North Korean origin.
   And America and Israel reportedly think the list should also include
   Syria. An Israeli air raid in September is thought to have targeted a
   nuclear site--possibly a building to house a reactor--being built with
   North Korean assistance. Syria has bought missiles from North Korea,
   but both deny nuclear co-operation.

   There might be more. Before talk of a Syrian connection, an article in
   the March issue of Arms Control Today by Siegfried Hecker and William
   Liou listed the many ways North Korea's nuclear expertise could be of
   use to Iran, which also has suspect nuclear ambitions. Mr Kim
   co-operates closely with Iran on missile development, and most
   recently supplied it with nuclear-capable missiles able to fly 2,500km
   (1,150 miles). He has also helped it build secretive underground
   tunnels.

   A North Korean list devoid of all outside nuclear connections would be
   one damaging development; full disclosure could be another sort of
   bombshell.

