
   Thailand is on the election trail and heading towards uncertainty

                                                                  Reuters

                                  Reuters

   "WE'RE not selling fish sauce, this is an election rally," jokes
   Sombat Ratano as he walks alongside his campaign truck with a
   microphone, hailing the voters of a rural village in Ubon Ratchathani
   province. In Isaan, Thailand's poor and populous north-east region,
   support is still strong for Thaksin Shinawatra, the prime minister
   deposed by a military coup in September 2006. Mr Sombat is a candidate
   in the December 23rd general election. He is standing for the People's
   Power Party (PPP), a reincarnation of Mr Thaksin's Thai Rak Thai
   (TRT), which was disbanded after the coup. As he tours the village, he
   drops Mr Thaksin's name at every opportunity, promising to revive the
   policies--from cheap health care to farming loans--that made the
   former prime minister popular.

   Pakistan is not the only Asian country where a dodgy military regime
   is running a general election under dubious electoral rules in the
   hope of keeping out a similarly dodgy civilian whom it overthrew. The
   difference is that unlike Benazir Bhutto in Pakistan, the exiled Mr
   Thaksin is not being allowed to take part in the vote himself, and
   there may be slightly more hope that things will come out right in the
   end.

   Middle-class Bangkokians, who are as snooty about their country
   cousins as any metropolitan elite anywhere, often say that
   "uneducated" rural voters such as those in Isaan were bribed and
   tricked into voting for Mr Thaksin. But rural voters were quite
   rational in handing him landslide victories in 2001 and 2005. He was
   Thailand's first party leader to promise and deliver a comprehensive
   set of policies aimed at the mass of voters. The allegations of
   corruption, conflicts of interest and vote-buying that surround him
   are serious but hardly unusual: such practices are endemic in Thai
   politics.

   The gravest allegation against Mr Thaksin is that in a "war on drugs"
   in 2003 he seemed to be encouraging extra-judicial killings of
   suspected drug-dealers by police. An investigation into this, started
   after the coup, remains incomplete--perhaps because the policy,
   however brutal, was also popular. Amid signs of resurgent amphetamine
   abuse, the PPP unashamedly talks of reviving it.

   On his shirt Mr Sombat bears the logo of King Bhumibol's 80th birthday
   celebrations, held earlier in December. This is a subtle riposte to
   the military junta's accusation that Mr Thaksin and his party do not
   respect the country's revered monarch, whose portrait is as
   omnipresent in the Isaan countryside as it is around Bangkok's royal
   palaces. The PPP has also hired Samak Sundaravej, an arch-royalist, as
   stand-in leader while Mr Thaksin remains abroad. Though close to the
   palace, Mr Samak is a foe of General Prem Tinsulanonda, the king's
   chief adviser and, Thaksinites allege, mastermind of the coup.

   Many parties, old and new, are contesting the election. Some have
   brought military men on board, hoping for army backing. Niran
   Pitakwatchara, a local doctor standing in Ubon Ratchathani for
   Matchimathipataya, one of the new parties, reckons voters have started
   to see the flaws in Mr Thaksin's policies. But all the other parties,
   including Mr Niran's, have adopted copycat versions of them--making
   them awkward to attack.

   The generals who staged the coup claimed to be saving Thai democracy
   from Mr Thaksin's abuses. Their dictatorship has been a pretty mild
   one and they are keeping their promise to hold the election by the end
   of 2007. But they presumably hoped the former leader would be
   forgotten by now. He has not been. Though Thailand's quirky opinion
   polls must be treated with caution, most predict that the PPP will win
   comfortably more seats than its nearest rival, the Democrats, although
   not a majority. The widespread assumption is that the Democrats will
   nevertheless form a ramshackle coalition. The problem is that Abhisit
   Vejjajiva, the Democrats' leader, though young and handsome, may not
   command enough respect to lead a fractious government.

   Until the coup, Thailand seemed to be escaping its historic cycle of
   alternating military dictatorships and weak civilian rule. By the late
   1990s it had become a beacon of multi-party democracy in Asia. Whether
   that beacon will shine again is unclear. If a Democrat-led coalition
   takes office, the PPP seems likely to make its life difficult and
   short-lived. If the PPP leads the next government, a peace pact with
   the generals is possible but the military men are bound to be nervous.
   The PPP promises to rescind a political ban that a tribunal created by
   the junta imposed on Mr Thaksin and 110 allies. If he returns, he
   would be able to scrap the amnesty that the coupmakers granted
   themselves--and put them in the dock.

   General Anupong Paojinda, a new army chief who took over in October,
   insists there will be no coup even if the Thaksinites win. Then again,
   General Sonthi Boonyaratglin, his predecessor, repeatedly made the
   same promise right up to the moment he overthrew Mr Thaksin.

   The generals, courtiers and bureaucrats who have been in charge for
   the past 15 months have ruled dismally. Thailand's economy is now one
   of the slowest-growing in booming Asia. The army-appointed interim
   government has become ever more invisible as its popularity has sunk.
   General Sonthi, presumably fearing humiliation, quietly dropped plans
   to stand in the election. But it is unclear whether the army and its
   civilian backers have learned the old lesson that coups and
   extra-constitutional excursions tend to make political crises worse
   and do not produce good government.

   Thailand's judicial and regulatory institutions are on trial in the
   election. For example, a new Election Commission, appointed with
   little dissent in the turmoil shortly before the coup, faces
   accusations of partiality. It absolved the military junta of plotting
   to subvert the election by undermining the PPP, despite the discovery
   of army documents detailing the plot. But the commission is now
   threatening to disqualify the PPP over the less serious matter of a
   video clip in which Mr Thaksin breaches his ban on politicking and
   urges support for his party.

   The commission and courts will have lots of complaints to handle after
   the polls close. If they enforce the rules impartially and promptly,
   they could set Thailand back on the road to democracy. If they are
   arbitrary, biased or dilatory, they may doom it to more years of
   instability--especially if they leave the impression that the people
   have voted for Thaksinism, only to have their will subverted.

