
   The chief minister wins again


   THE teetotal state of Gujarat, in the west of India, has once again
   revealed a taste for a strong political brew. On December 23rd a vote
   count showed that the state's chief minister, Narendra Modi, romped
   home to another big victory in elections to the state assembly held
   earlier that month. Mr Modi, a member of the Hindu-nationalist
   Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP), was already the most controversial
   figure in Indian politics. He may now become one of the most
   influential.

   Once the size of Mr Modi's win was confirmed--the BJP carried 117 out
   of 182 seats--it became hard to remember why anyone thought he might
   lose. But the Congress party had raised its hopes, if not its game, in
   this campaign. Sonia Gandhi, the party's leader, crossed swords with
   him. The leaders of two powerful Gujarati castes, the Patels and the
   Kolis, had fallen out with him (at least until he won). And some of
   the party's foot-soldiers also resented a leader who owes more to a
   personality cult than to them. As Mr Modi's supporters donned smiling
   "Modi" masks, some of the rank-and-file grumbled that no one was
   bigger than the party.

   Mr Modi had won the previous election, in 2002, in special
   circumstances, just ten months after 58 rail passengers, many of them
   Hindu activists, died in a blaze blamed on a Muslim mob. The
   anti-Muslim sentiment unleashed by that incident--up to 2,000 people
   were killed in the pogrom that followed--helped sweep Mr Modi to
   victory.

   Since then, the state's Muslims have "learned to live with downcast
   eyes", as a report by one local lobby group puts it. But the rest of
   the state has its head up and its chest out. Always prosperous and
   enterprising, Gujarat is now booming. Its voters clearly credit some
   of this prosperity to Mr Modi's administration, which is notably less
   venal and ineffectual than those Indians in most other states have to
   endure.

   India's nightmare is that the millions left behind by its new
   prosperity might lash out, turning to Maoist violence. But equally
   sinister is the prospect of its aspirant classes casting their lot
   with a business-friendly strongman who promises to make the proverbial
   trains run on time and to keep disaffected minorities in check.

   The BJP is short of "tall" leaders. L.K. Advani, its candidate for
   prime minister, is 80. The party's president, Rajnath Singh, has made
   little impression: no one is wearing masks made in his likeness. Mr
   Modi, on the other hand, has attracted intelligent and ambitious
   strategists, such as Arun Jaitley, who would not waste their talents
   on him if they thought him no more than a provincial demagogue.

   But his campaign, so successful within the state, may have done some
   damage to his larger ambitions. His frequent appeals to Gujarati
   chauvinism jar outside the state, and he struggled to maintain decorum
   when provoked. After Mrs Gandhi's reference to "merchants of death"
   was taken as an allusion to his alleged connivance in the 2002 pogrom,
   his defiant response appeared to justify a notorious 2005 murder by
   policemen in his state. The exchange earned both leaders a reprimand
   from India's Election Commission. This populism may win votes. But the
   BJP must also remain acceptable to a coalition of parties if it is
   once again to head a national government. Mr Advani has had to soften
   his image to lead his party. If Mr Modi is ever to succeed him, he too
   will need to try on a different mask.

