
   Neither very peaceful, nor in process

   A MONTH after the abduction of a journalist, Birendra Sah, in the
   district of Bara in southern Nepal, three Maoist parliamentarians this
   week announced the findings of their own inquiry into the affair. They
   concluded that two local Maoist officials had shot Mr Sah dead, on the
   orders of their local superior but outside party policy. This followed
   weeks of obfuscation from the Maoist leadership and the government and
   came after Mr Sah's weeping wife appeared in public in Kathmandu.

   Although last year's peace agreement officially ended the Maoist
   insurrection, abductions, threats and violence have continued. The
   Terai, the southern plain, is now the most violent part of Nepal.
   Perpetrators include the Maoists, a string of new militant and
   criminal groups, and the army and police. There are now more than 20
   Terai factions, mostly claiming to espouse the rights of the
   marginalised southern peoples known as Madhesis. The daily litany of
   violence recalls the war years. In recent days a youth was burnt to
   death, a local politician had his throat slit and a bomb in the town
   of Birgunj killed one person.

   The backdrop to this violence is renewed political stalemate. In
   October elections to a constituent assembly, planned for this month,
   were postponed indefinitely. The Maoists had earlier walked out of the
   interim cabinet. They had a long series of new demands, notably a
   system of proportional representation for the elections, and the
   immediate abolition of the monarchy.

   The political limbo feeds the violence. It is rooted in the
   minorities' sense of continued discrimination; the politicians'
   obsession with short-term political gain; and the Maoists' failure so
   far to accept peaceful, competitive politics. As the Maoists struggle
   to overcome internal divisions between hardliners and pragmatists,
   their Young Communist League has revived their old system of parallel
   government and rough justice.

   Many other questions remain unresolved. The United Nations mission in
   Nepal, UNMIN, is concerned about the prolonged confinement of former
   Maoist fighters in 28 camps. This week UNMIN's head, Ian Martin,
   offered to discuss a long-term solution for them and the Nepal Army,
   which under the peace accord is meant to become more inclusive. The
   army's hardliners, however, resent any hint of UN involvement.

