
                                                                       AP

                                     AP

   A Maoist walk-out jeopardises the peace process


   RATHER than lose an election, Nepal's Maoists seem ready to scuttle
   it. On September 18th they announced that they were leaving the
   eight-party transitional government headed by Girija Prasad Koirala.
   They seemed to realise that they would do badly in elections,
   scheduled for November 22nd, for an assembly to draft a new
   constitution. Rather than risk humiliation, they shifted the
   goalposts, making demands beyond the powers of the interim
   constitution.

   That constitution provides for a "mixed election" to the constituent
   assembly, with half the members to be directly elected, and half
   through proportional representation. Expecting to fare better under a
   fully proportional system, the Maoists' leader, known as "Prachanda",
   demanded one be adopted. The interim constitution also promises that
   the future of Nepal's monarchy will be decided at the new assembly's
   first meeting. The Maoists demanded that the interim parliament
   immediately turn the country into a republic.

   The two large political parties, Mr Koirala's Nepali Congress and the
   mainstream Communists, known as the UML, had to decide how much ground
   to give to ensure elections would be held and peace preserved. There
   was talk of seat adjustments to ensure that a dozen Maoist leaders
   made it into the assembly. There were even promises that during the
   election campaign, all eight parties would make public commitments to
   vote for a republic.

   Ever since a popular movement brought an end to the autocratic rule of
   King Gyanendra in April 2006, the Maoists' position has been
   ambivalent. On the one hand, they have submitted to a United
   Nations-supervised "arms management" process--a euphemism for
   demobilisation. And, officially, they have given up their "people's
   war", which in ten years led to some 13,000 deaths, in order to join
   open, competitive politics. On the other hand, they have not equipped
   their cadres intellectually for non-violent politics. Instead they
   have let loose on the populace a corps of thugs, known as the Young
   Communist League. And last month a Maoist plenum saw militarist
   hardliners accuse the moderate leadership of "selling out" the
   revolution. In defensive response, Mr Prachanda and his chief
   ideologue, Baburam Bhattarai, stiffened their demands.

   It has not helped that the eight-party alliance is run autocratically
   by Mr Koirala, an ailing octogenarian in his sixth decade in politics.
   Whether out of choice or infirmity, he is increasingly remote, and has
   alienated his most important democratic ally, the UML's Madhav Kumar
   Nepal. As the Election Commission prepared for polls, the public
   watched nervously to see whether Mr Koirala or Mr Prachanda would
   blink first. Instead, the latter averted his gaze and stalked off.

   The timing of the Maoists' exit is at best irresponsible. Nepal is
   tackling three daunting challenges simultaneously: preparing for the
   first elections since 1999; rehabilitating the victims of the
   conflict; and restructuring the state, with the monarchy probably
   being shown the door.

   Opportunistic violence has flared in many parts of Nepal over the past
   year from historically disfranchised groups asserting their demands
   against the background of abject lack of government. Tensions between
   the people of the hills and those of the plains are worse than ever.
   Other linguistic, religious and regional divides are also being
   exploited. The Maoists' departure from government is likely to
   encourage violent groups, more of which are being established by the
   day.

   Delaying the election also gives King Gyanendra a breather--hardly the
   Maoists' intention. The Nepal Army, which waged a dirty war against
   the Maoists and supported the king's seizure of absolute power in
   February 2005, may also savour the prospect of a descent into anarchy
   and turmoil. It would justify its re-emergence from the barracks,
   where it has been sequestered in humiliation since April 2006. A
   reinvigorated Nepal Army is surely the last thing that the Maoists
   would want.

   There is still hope, however. Despite the fierce speeches surrounding
   their withdrawal, Maoist leaders did not reject the peace agreement
   they signed with the other political parties, nor the interim
   constitution, and have not left the eight-party alliance. At talks
   with the other parties on September 20th a compromise was discussed,
   in which parliament would make some token gesture of support for a
   republic, but leave the final say to the sovereign, elected
   constituent assembly.

