
   World powers suck up to the junta


   THE paranoia, secrecy and all-round villainy of the generals who run
   Myanmar (Burma) provide fertile ground for conspiracy theorists. Last
   month Myanmar restored diplomatic ties with North Korea. On May 15th,
   Russia said it was reviving a stalled plan to sell the country a small
   nuclear reactor. A few years ago, Abdul Qadeer Khan, Pakistan's
   notorious nuclear proliferator, reportedly visited the junta. Join the
   dots and a scary picture emerges: they must be making nukes.

   Entertaining though they are, such theories fall apart on closer
   examination. A new paper by a Myanmar analyst, Andrew Selth, dismisses
   the idea that the junta could produce nuclear bombs in the next
   decade. They lack the resources, expertise and even desire to build
   them: for all the regime's wickedness, it has been a consistent
   opponent of proliferation. The small Russian research reactor may
   achieve little besides satisfying the Burmese generals' desire for
   "prestigious" bits of technology. An earlier paper by Mr Selth
   debunked claims that China is building military bases along Myanmar's
   coast, from which to menace India and dominate the Indian Ocean. The
   xenophobic Burmese regime is too suspicious of China to give it a
   military presence on its turf.

   What really is happening is that China, Russia and another would-be
   great power, India, are scrabbling to do deals with Myanmar's regime.
   Like vultures eyeing carrion, they are salivating over the benighted
   country's rich natural resources. The Burmese generals are in the
   happy position of setting competing powers against one another, while
   enlisting their help in resisting pressure to restore democracy. In
   January, Russia and China--both of which have signed big oil and gas
   deals with Myanmar--vetoed America's proposed censure of the Burmese
   regime in the United Nations Security Council.

   India used to join the West in demanding democratic change. But the
   rumours about Chinese military bases, plus India's own thirst for
   energy, made it forget its principles and start wooing Burmese
   generals with guns and money. This all takes place behind a figleaf of
   "constructive engagement". The junta was said to have been
   dissatisfied with cheap Chinese arms, so India's sales of weapons,
   said to range from artillery to reconnaissance aircraft, will have
   been most welcome.

   The Chinese know they are unlikely to get to use Myanmar as a military
   platform. But by developing the country's oil and gas fields, and by
   building pipelines to Myanmar's Indian Ocean ports, they hope to
   reduce their vulnerability to a blockade of the Malacca Strait,
   through which they import much of their oil.

   However, as India is learning, Burmese generals are unreliable. Two
   Indian energy firms and a South Korean one have spent heavily on
   developing an offshore gas field in Myanmar, only to be
   unceremoniously dumped now that the Chinese have come along waving a
   larger cheque.

   On May 27th the house arrest of Myanmar's pro-democracy leader, Aung
   San Suu Kyi, is due to expire--but the regime is widely expected to
   extend it instead. America and the European Union recently renewed
   sanctions against the junta but neither the West's tough approach nor
   "constructive engagement" has budged the regime. With so many big
   powers slavering to do business with it, the chances of change look as
   bleak as ever.

