
   The front-runner in South Korea's presidential poll is nicknamed the
   bulldozer. He seems to be boring his way towards the Blue House

                                                                  Reuters

                                  Reuters


   NOT many people can realistically hope to be elected president on
   their birthday. But December 19th is not only election day in South
   Korea but also the 66th birthday and 37th wedding anniversary of the
   runaway favourite, Lee Myung-bak. Mr Lee is a former mayor of Seoul
   who has led the opinion polls throughout the year by a country mile.
   This month prosecutors absolved him of involvement in an investment
   fraud, seemingly clearing away his last hurdle before the vote.

   Yet few seem to muster much enthusiasm for the birthday boy. At his
   campaign rallies supporters clad in blue sweatshirts bearing his
   likeness try to galvanise onlookers with chants, dance routines and a
   throbbing, disco-like campaign song. The crowds remain desultory. In
   one stop outside Seoul earlier this month, the biggest cheer was for a
   group of children who waved at the candidate from the open windows of
   their school.

   This is odd. Presidential elections used to arouse paroxysms of
   emotion in South Korea. If Mr Lee were to win, he would bring an end
   to a decade of rule by two presidents, Kim Dae-jung and Roh Moo-hyun,
   who were liberal in the Korean sense (that is, slightly less
   pro-business and pro-American). His party represents the conservative
   old guard, though he himself is not a member of the traditional elite,
   nor does he hold their hardline views about North Korea. Whoever
   becomes president, moreover, will take over at a time when relations
   between the hermit kingdom and the rest of the world have reached a
   delicate point, with the rest still unsure about whether the North
   will give up its nuclear weapons.

   Why then has the 2007 campaign ignited so little passion? Perhaps
   because Mr Lee has enjoyed a lead in the opinion polls for so long (in
   the week before the vote, he was over 20 points ahead of his main
   rivals, who seem almost to have given up). Perhaps because no one else
   has caught the public's imagination either. The main challengers
   include a disaffected former leader of Mr Lee's Grand National Party,
   Lee Hoi-chang, who has twice failed to win the presidency. The leading
   liberal candidate, Chung Dong-young, is a former television anchorman
   who has turned off voters with his personal attacks on Mr Lee.

   And perhaps because of the man himself. Raspy-voiced, with a
   reputation for being aloof and prickly, Mr Lee is not a natural
   politician. He refuses to appear on South Korea's main commercial
   broadcaster, MBC, because he accuses it of bias. Every day ranks of
   police officers guard the main entrance of MBC as Mr Lee's supporters
   denounce its journalists. But like the presidential campaign itself,
   the protests lack numbers and fire.

   Ordinarily, his opponents might have been able to exploit Mr Lee's
   stilted manner. Instead it has become an advantage. Koreans care
   mainly about the economy. They want a competent manager and Mr Lee
   seems to fit the bill. As a child, he helped his mother sell popsicles
   and seaweed rolls. He put himself through university by working as a
   rubbish collector. He rose through the ranks of Hyundai to become
   chief executive of ten different affiliates. Lingering suspicion that
   his business dealings may not have been pristine has been overlooked.
   South Korea is going through a period of relative economic malaise and
   voters want faster growth than the 5% achieved last year under
   President Roh, the best showing of his presidency.

   Rising property prices have pushed workers in Seoul, home to half the
   population, far away from the capital, causing endless commutes to
   12-hour-a-day jobs. Parents who pay for private classes so their
   children can keep up in pressure-cooker schools want changes to the
   education system. Many Koreans demand a comprehensive social-security
   system, as befits the world's 13th largest economy. The next president
   will also have to ensure it is not business as usual between his
   office, the Blue House, and the country's conglomerates. The biggest,
   Samsung, stands accused by a former executive of widespread bribery,
   including of politicians.

   Mr Lee is responding to these varied demands with a
   comprehensive--even grandiose--list of promises. He says he can get
   growth up to 7% a year, bring average incomes up to $40,000 a year and
   make South Korea the world's seventh-largest economy by 2017. All this
   is to be achieved by cutting taxes, trimming public spending by 10%,
   easing the burden of regulation, improving the efficiency of medical
   spending and building a giant canal system through the middle of the
   country to create jobs and cut pollution. He is not promising to make
   pigs fly.

   If he wins, Mr Lee will face divisions in both country and party.
   Since the end of the Korean War, South Korea has been split along
   regional lines. The eastern part, Gyeongsang, has traditionally
   produced the country's leaders (Mr Lee grew up there, though he was
   born in Japan). They have tended to favour their hometowns at the
   expense of the south-west Jeolla region.

   The Grand National Party is also beset by internal rifts, notably
   between Mr Lee and Park Geun-hye, the daughter of a former military
   dictator, Park Chung-hee. Ms Park wants to run for president in five
   years' time. She also wants a hand in picking the party's candidates
   for parliamentary elections due in April 2008. If they cannot work
   together, Mr Lee's proposals may face an icy reception in parliament.

   Mr Lee has few specific ideas about getting North Korea to give up its
   nuclear weapons, beyond making aid and investment conditional on
   disarmament. "North Korea must take steps to demonstrate it wants
   peace before there is widespread economic assistance or investment by
   South Korea," says one of his closest foreign-policy advisers. In Mr
   Lee's view, the last two presidents have weakened South Korea's
   military alliance with America, and he promises to reinvigorate it. He
   also plans a range of co-operative economic agreements with Asian
   neighbours--and with Russia, in the hope of securing long-term oil and
   gas contracts in eastern Siberia. In short, all things to all
   countries.

   Many South Koreans have been disappointed by the decade-long rule of
   liberal presidents who promised much but failed to deliver either
   strong growth or uncorrupt leadership. They were also put off by
   President Roh's inability to create more jobs and reduce social
   inequality. In contrast Mr Lee's record as mayor of Seoul suggests he
   can get things done. But if he does win, he will do so partly because
   he has raised expectations--and will suffer all the more if he cannot
   live up to them.

