
   A president-elect starts to roll

   ASKED about the power of the president in South Korea, an aide to Lee
   Myung-bak, who was elected to the post last month, said he could do
   anything except change a man into a woman or a woman into a man. Not
   yet, anyway. Mr Lee, who will assume office on February 25th, will
   concentrate yet more power in the presidential palace, Seoul's Blue
   House.

   At a news conference this week, Mr Lee promised a slimmed-down
   government. The number of ministries will be cut from 18 to 13 by
   eliminating or merging functions. Important economic and
   foreign-policy decisions will come from his office. He has also
   promised to privatise state-owned banks and other businesses. Cuts in
   corporate and personal taxation are also in the offing. "The Korean
   economy is too large and too complex to be managed by the government,"
   he says. But he seems to intend giving it his best shot.

   In December Mr Lee urged the chairmen of the country's biggest
   conglomerates to invest more in their homeland. He has asked South
   Korea's mobile-phone operators to cut their charges. And he remains
   committed to building a canal system through the country. Critics
   deride the scheme as economic lunacy and a boon for construction
   companies such as the one Mr Lee used to run, Hyundai Construction.
   Others have drawn overblown comparisons between his leadership style
   and that of Park Chung-hee, a former military dictator with a penchant
   for economic micro-management.

   That may be unfair. Mr Lee was elected because the country responded
   to his pledge of faster economic growth. As befits a former
   businessman, he is pragmatic rather than ideological. He maintains
   uneasy relations with his conservative Grand National Party. The GNP
   is there to win him seats in April's parliamentary election so he can
   pass laws.

   Conservatives howled in protest when Kim Man-bok, boss of South
   Korea's spy agency, told North Korea that Mr Lee's election victory
   would not change the South's policy of engaging it. He was forced to
   make a public apology and resign. The same day, as if to emphasise his
   hardline credentials, Mr Lee visited the American army base in central
   Seoul.

