
   The politicians are still fighting the war of independence, 36 years
   on

                                                                      AFP
                                                                      AFP

                                   Nizami's youth comes back to haunt him


   THE army-backed interim government running Bangladesh since January
   has been struggling to bring corrupt politicians and businessmen to
   trial. Now it faces mounting pressure also to prosecute those involved
   in "war crimes" during the country's war of independence in 1971. In
   recent weeks, the big political parties--in a rare display of
   unity--have jointly demanded that the government ban "war criminals"
   from contesting the parliamentary election due late next year.

   In effect, this would transform the government's "minus-two"
   strategy--the removal from politics of Sheikh Hasina Wajed and Khaleda
   Zia, leaders of the two biggest political parties--into "minus three".
   Talk of war-crimes trials leads inexorably to one person, Motiur
   Rahman Nizami, leader of the third-largest party, Jamaat-e-Islami.
   Shahrier Kabir, the head of the Nirmul Committee, a group campaigning
   for the trial of the 1971 war criminals, says he has "no doubt" that
   the case against Mr Nizami and his associates would stand up in a
   court of law, and wants the government to set up a tribunal.

   Bangladesh became independent in December 1971, after a nine-month war
   that pitted Bengali-dominated East Pakistan against West Pakistan. The
   West's army, with its appeal to Islamic unity, had the support of many
   of East Pakistan's fundamentalist parties. The most extreme of these
   was the Jamaat-e-Islami, whose student wing became the main source of
   a pro-army paramilitary body called Al Badr, which was led by Mr
   Nizami. Its members are alleged, among other atrocities, to have
   abducted and murdered dozens of senior journalists and academics.

   Frequent calls for war-crimes trials have been ignored. This time,
   however, the unelected government's hand may be forced by the new
   unity among the big parties, and by support for the demands among
   parts of the army. The army may want only to clip Jamaat's wings and
   cleanse it of the taint of 1971. Many civilians, however, are
   motivated by distrust of religion-based politics.

   Time is running out. Many witnesses, and many of the accused, have
   died. The head of the interim administration, Fakhruddin Ahmed, has
   said that the government would welcome prosecutions initiated by
   private citizens. But citizens' groups insist that the state must act
   as prosecutor in crimes of such magnitude.

   So far, the interim government has not faced a serious political
   challenge. But election boycotts are a common tactic in Bangladesh,
   and could be used to put pressure on it--provided, of course, that its
   military backers decide to go ahead with the polls. Trials relating to
   crimes committed so long ago may seem irrelevant in a country facing
   so many immediate disasters. It is still reeling from Cyclone Sidr and
   devastating floods. But for those demanding trials, Bangladesh's very
   identity is at stake. Many agreed with Zafar Sobhan, a political
   commentator, when he wrote recently that the immunity enjoyed by
   Jamaat since 1971 is the country's "original sin", polluting the body
   politic far worse even than financial corruption. Is there another
   country, he asked, where those, like Jamaat, "who opposed the birth of
   a country or those who collaborated with its enemies" have been
   rehabilitated?

