
   Labor is working. Non-stop


   WHEN he led Australia's Labor Party to a resounding election victory
   last November, Kevin Rudd warned members of his new cabinet they could
   expect just two days off at Christmas. Even for a workaholic such as
   Mr Rudd, this proved optimistic. Australia traditionally sinks into a
   summer slumber in January. The new prime minister wisely reconsidered
   and took a two-week holiday himself. Back at work on January 14th, he
   at once sent signals that he plans to be as stingy with taxpayers'
   money as he expects his ministers to be with their free time.

   The next day he and Wayne Swan, the treasurer (finance minister),
   visited the Sydney headquarters of Australia's independent central
   bank. Mr Swan explained that the meeting was all about showing
   government "restraint" in a bid to tame inflation. Labor took power
   with a mandate to change the political climate. But the economy looms
   as its biggest worry.

   After more than 16 consecutive years of growth, some measures of
   inflation are running at about 3% a year. The central bank has raised
   interest rates six times since 2004; economists predict another rise
   in February. On top of these, Australia's big retail banks have raised
   their rates in response to the global credit crunch.

   A survey this week showed a sharp fall in consumer confidence. Mr
   Rudd's ministers will finger the former conservative government of
   John Howard. Over 11 years in power, especially the past three, Mr
   Howard was prone to splashing money around to buy votes. All this will
   make it hard for Mr Rudd to meet his own election promise to pour
   money into health and education, and to phase in tax cuts worth A$31
   billion ($28 billion). Mr Swan has already pledged to cut A$10 billion
   from spending in his first budget in May.

   On foreign policy, Mr Rudd has shown he means business in taking a
   less blustery and less pro-American approach in Australia's region.
   After his election, the first foreign leader Mr Rudd invited to his
   Brisbane home was Helen Clark, the prime minister of New Zealand. Then
   he went to the UN climate-change conference in Bali and reversed the
   Howard government's refusal to ratify the Kyoto protocol.

   On January 15th the government also reversed Mr Howard's decision to
   sell uranium to India. Australia holds about 40% of the world's known
   uranium, and the deal was less about commerce than about backing an
   American agreement on civil nuclear co-operation with India. It went
   against the grain of Australia's refusal up to then to sell uranium to
   India and other countries that had not signed the Nuclear
   Non-Proliferation Treaty.

   For all this, Mr Rudd remains possibly the most enigmatic prime
   minister Australians have elected. The real balance of conservative,
   reformer and radical in him remains to be discovered once Parliament
   resumes in February. He has ordained already that Parliament will sit
   for five days a week instead of four. Reluctantly granted a holiday in
   January, his ministers can expect little sleep for the rest of the
   year.

