
                                                                  Reuters

                                  Reuters

   General Musharraf goes back to Civvy Street. Other civilians are not
   happy


   PERVEZ MUSHARRAF, Pakistan's beleaguered president, who prides himself
   on being a man of his word, had often promised to stand down as chief
   of the army. So on November 28th he inspected a guard of honour in
   Rawalpindi and passed the baton to General Ashfaq Pervez Kayani.
   Dressed in full regalia and bursting with emotion, General Musharraf
   said: "This army is my life, my passion. I love this army, and this
   relationship will continue, although I will not be in uniform." Aptly,
   the military band gave him a stirring send-off with "Auld Lang Syne".

   The next day plain "Mr" Musharraf was sworn in as a civilian president
   of the country by his new handpicked chief justice. His advisers say
   that President Musharraf will soon lift the state of emergency he
   imposed on November 3rd. That unconstitutional "deviation", as it is
   called in Pakistan, enabled Mr Musharraf to sack 12 judges of the
   supreme court who seemed bent on overthrowing him. He replaced them
   with more pliant ones. They have now duly legitimised his presidency.

   Even by Pakistani standards, it has been a tumultuous week. Mr
   Musharraf had long thundered that he would not allow Nawaz Sharif, the
   former prime minister he ousted in a coup in 1999, to return to
   Pakistan from exile in Saudi Arabia and rejoin politics. Indeed, when
   Mr Sharif tried to come home in September, he was bundled into a
   waiting aircraft at Islamabad and shunted off to Jeddah. But another
   former prime minister in exile, Benazir Bhutto, was allowed back on
   October 18th, thanks to American pressure on General Musharraf to make
   an alliance with her liberal People's Party. Mr Musharraf flew to
   Riyadh on November 22nd in a bid to convince King Abdullah to hang on
   to Mr Sharif until after the general elections on January 8th. But,
   far from entertaining the plea, the monarch dispatched Mr Sharif to
   Pakistan in a royal aircraft on November 25th, just in time to file
   his nomination papers for the elections.

   The opposition is seized with the difficulty of ensuring free and fair
   elections, or, failing that, of forging a united front to boycott the
   polls. Neither task is easy. Mr Musharraf has packed the election
   commission and caretaker administration with loyalists and rigged the
   rules.

   The opposition, moreover, is divided. Miss Bhutto has gauged her
   popularity--huge crowds welcomed her on October 18th--and wants to
   contest an election. But she is using the threat of a boycott to press
   demands that the state of emergency be lifted, pro-Musharraf local
   governments suspended, and the election commission reformed. Maulana
   Fazal ur Rehman, the leader of the biggest religious party, wants much
   the same. He hopes to form governments in the North-West Frontier
   province and Baluchistan.

   Only Mr Sharif favours a boycott. But he fears he would be sidelined
   if he goes it alone. So he is hedging his bets. He has filed his
   nomination papers but is also hoping for an all-parties conference to
   agree on a boycott. If, as seems likely, Mr Musharraf meets some
   opposition demands, the elections will go ahead.

   But they may not provide stability to Mr Musharraf's position--let
   alone Pakistan's. The country is bitterly divided across religious,
   regional, ethnic and class lines. Coalition governments in Islamabad
   and in the provinces are inevitable. As in the past, Mr Musharraf's
   party will be inclined to make alliances with the religious parties.
   But that will be looked at askance in America, which frets that such
   expedient political alliances help explain why Mr Musharraf's
   prosecution of the war against Islamist terrorists is ineffectual.

   However, if Mr Musharraf wants a deal with Miss Bhutto, he will have
   to share power with her, perhaps as prime minister, a prospect neither
   he nor his party relishes. If he spurns her, she will join hands with
   Mr Sharif and the mullahs to dethrone him. When Parliament meets in
   February, he will need a two-thirds majority to legitimise his
   "deviation" on November 3rd. Failing that, he would risk impeachment
   and have to turn for help to his new army chief, General Kayani.
   Pakistan would revert to rule by the "troika" of army chief, president
   and prime minister, an arrangement that has scarred politics since the
   restoration of democracy in 1988. One elected government after another
   has been sacked by the president (thrice) or the army chief (once, in
   1999).

