
                                                              James Miles

                                James Miles

   China's Communist Party, reconsidering Marx's words, is starting to
   wonder whether there might not be a use for religion after all


   "DEVELOP the dragon spirit; establish a dragon culture," urge large
   green characters at the high school in Hongliutan, a poor village at
   the foot of a range of bleak loess hills. Though dragon can be a
   synonym for China, it is a god known as the Black Dragon that is being
   invoked here. Without funds from the Black Dragon's hillside temple,
   in a gully behind the village, the school would not exist. Nor, most
   likely, would the adjacent primary school and the irrigation system
   that brings water from the nearby Wuding River to the village's maize
   and cabbage fields.

   Many local governments in rural China are mired in debt. Recent
   central government efforts to keep peasants happy by abolishing
   centuries-old taxes have not made life any easier for these
   bureaucracies. With their revenues cut, rural authorities have found
   it ever more difficult to scrape together money for health care and
   education. So they are only too happy to allow others to share the
   burden of providing these services--even the Black Dragon, whose
   500-year-old temple was demolished by Maoist radicals during the
   Cultural Revolution in the 1960s. Now officials in Yulin, the
   prefecture to which Hongliutan belongs, give the temple their
   blessing.

   The revival of the Black Dragon Temple's fortunes is part of a
   resurgence of religious or quasi-religious activity across China
   that--notwithstanding occasional crackdowns--is transforming the
   social and political landscape of many parts of the countryside.
   Religion is also attracting many people in the cities, where the
   party's atheist ideology has traditionally held stronger sway.

   The resurgence encompasses ancient folk religions and ancestor
   worship, along with the organised religions of Buddhism, Taoism, Islam
   (among ethnic minorities) and, most strikingly, given its foreign
   origins and relatively short history in China, Christianity. In the
   face of this onslaught, the party is beginning to rethink its approach
   to religion. It now acknowledges that it may even have its uses.

   In Hongliutan the party appears in retreat. It is not the party
   secretary Zhang Tieniu who holds sway. Mr Zhang was the youngest party
   chief in the prefecture when he was appointed last year at the age of
   32. But in a culture that reveres age, some villagers refer to him
   dismissively as a "lad". The man in charge in Hongliutan is
   64-year-old Wang Kehua. Mr Wang happens to belong to the village's
   main clan. He is also the village's elected chief (a post which in
   most villages is subordinate to that of party secretary). More to the
   point, he controls the temple and its money.

   It was Mr Wang's idea to rebuild the temple in 1986, a decade after
   Mao's death. Mr Wang, who had become one of the village's wealthiest
   men by wheeling and dealing elsewhere, donated some of his own money
   and organised villagers to add theirs. It was a promising venture.
   Historically, the Black Dragon Temple had a reputation extending far
   beyond the village. The dragon was renowned in the parched semi-desert
   of the north of Shaanxi Province, 600 kilometres (370 miles) west of
   Beijing, as a bringer of rain. If the temple was rebuilt, people would
   come, pray to the dragon--and spend money.

   Mr Wang does not, however, speak of commercial motives. In the bare
   concrete-walled room he calls his office, he describes how, one after
   the other, the half-dozen villagers who had destroyed the temple in
   the 1960s fell victim to the vengeful dragon in subsequent years. The
   man who had broken off the head of the Black Dragon's effigy (the god
   is worshipped in a human-looking form, as shown in the picture above)
   had his head blown off when a factory boiler exploded. Another bled to
   death after accidentally chopping his foot with an axe. One was
   crushed by a donkey cart. Their offspring also suffered ill fate.
   These events, says Mr Wang, convinced him of the power of the dragon
   and of the importance of reviving its worship.

   The temple has no clergy. Visitors are mainly drawn by their belief in
   the dragon's power to tell the future. Many want to know whether
   business ventures or marriages will succeed. Mr Wang asked the Black
   Dragon whether the divinity approved his appointment as temple chief.
   It did. The dragon's responses are given in the form of obscurely
   worded classical poems written on pieces of paper issued by a
   70-year-old villager, Chen Yushan, clad in his blue padded Mao suit.
   Mr Chen offers his interpretation of what these poems mean. An
   entrepreneur who is told his business will be successful, and who then
   enjoys financial success, is quite likely to make a big donation to
   the temple.

   Turning a blind eye

   Officially, the party regards folk religion as superstition, the
   public practice of which is illegal. But in many rural areas officials
   now bend the rules. In Yulin prefecture, with 3.4m people, there are
   106 officially registered places of worship and many more that are not
   officially sanctioned. Most are not part of the five mainstream
   religions (China regards the two Christian traditions, Catholicism and
   Protestantism, as separate) that the party recognises. But Yulin has
   allowed the Black Dragon Temple to affiliate itself with the
   government-sponsored Taoist Association. This gives it a cloak of
   legitimacy. So too does an arboretum that Mr Wang has planted with
   temple funds (at the dragon's request, he says, but it also helps him
   show officials how the village is contributing to government efforts
   to stop the desert encroaching).

   Local officials themselves benefit from the greater tolerance. For all
   the party's dictatorial ways, government officers are often fearful of
   triggering unrest by enforcing unpopular policies that are not all
   that vital to the party's interests (hence the increasingly patchy
   implementation of population control). Demonstrations in an official's
   jurisdiction can do far more damage to his career than turning a blind
   eye to popular religion--so long as such activity does not directly
   challenge the party.

   There are also more tangible rewards. In his book "Miraculous
   Response", Adam Yuet Chau of the School of Oriental and African
   Studies in London says that temples applying for official registration
   typically have to treat local officials to banquets. Officials, he
   adds, support temples that pay them respect and tribute. They also
   gain financially from taxes levied on merchants who do business at
   temple fairs. Policemen invited to maintain order at these occasions
   are paid with cash, good food and liquor.

   In the view of local officials, Mr Chau argues, temples play the same
   kind of role as commercial enterprises. They generate prosperity for
   the local economy and income for the local government. This is
   especially true of the Black Dragon Temple, which says it attracts
   200,000 people to its ten-day summer fair (the Black Dragon himself,
   villagers say, has also shown up in the form of an unusually shaped
   cloud).

   Evidence of China's religious revival can be seen throughout the
   countryside in the form of lavish new temples, halls for ancestor
   worship, churches and mosques (except in the far western province of
   Xinjiang, where the government worries that Islam is intertwined with
   ethnic separatism and keeps tighter rein). Officially there are more
   than 100m religious believers in China (see table), or about 10% of
   the population. But experts say the real number is very much higher.

   This does not mean that China has embraced religious freedom. Some
   religions--Tibetan Buddhism, Islam as practised in Xinjiang,
   Catholicism and "house church" Protestantism, which involves informal
   gatherings of believers outside registered churches--are still subject
   to tight controls because of the party's fears that their followers
   might have an anti-government bent. A seven-year-old crackdown on
   Falun Gong, a quasi-Buddhist sect that flourished in the 1990s, is
   still being pursued with ruthless intensity. Many Falun Gong
   practitioners, as well as lesser numbers of followers of other faiths
   who refuse to accept state attempts to regulate their religions, are
   imprisoned in labour camps.

   Within the party, however, debate is growing about whether it should
   take a different approach to religion. This does not mean being more
   liberal towards what it regards as anti-government activities. But it
   could mean toning down the party's atheist rhetoric and showing
   stronger support for faiths that have deep historical roots among the
   ethnic Han majority. The party is acutely aware that its own ideology
   holds little attraction for most ordinary people. Given that many are
   drawn to other beliefs, it might do better to try to win over public
   opinion by actively supporting these beliefs rather than grudgingly
   tolerating them or cracking down.

   Pan Yue, then a senior official dealing with economic reforms and now
   deputy director of the State Environmental Protection Administration,
   argued in an article published in 2001 that the party's traditional
   view of religion was wrong. Marx, he said, did not mean to imply that
   religion was a bad thing when he referred to it as the opium of the
   people. Religion, he said, could just as easily exist in socialist
   societies as it does in capitalist ones. He also singled out Buddhism
   and Taoism for having helped to bolster social stability through
   successive Chinese dynasties. Stability being of paramount concern to
   the party today, Mr Pan's message was clear.

   In praise of harmony

   His article angered party conservatives at the time: the party's
   official stance is that religion will die out under socialism. But
   more recently the party itself has begun to put a more positive spin
   on the role of religion. Last April China organised a meeting of
   Buddhist leaders from around the world in the coastal province of
   Zhejiang (it did not, however, invite the Dalai Lama, Tibet's exiled
   spiritual leader). The event was given considerable prominence in the
   official media. The theme, "A harmonious world begins in the mind",
   echoed the party's recent propaganda drive concerning the need for a
   "harmonious society". It implied just what Mr Pan had suggested-- that
   the opium Marx was talking about should be seen as a benign spiritual
   salve. In October the party's Central Committee issued a document on
   how to build a harmonious society, arguing that religion could play a
   "positive role".

   The party's change of tone coincides with its recent efforts to revive
   traditional culture as a way of giving China, in its state of rapid
   economic and social flux, a bit more cohesion. The term "harmonious
   society", which in recent months has become a party mantra, sounds in
   Chinese (hexie shehui) like an allusion to classical notions of social
   order in which people do not challenge their role in life and treat
   each other kindly. It is, in effect, a rejection of the Marxist notion
   of class struggle.

   Officials are now encouraging a revival of the study of Confucianism,
   a philosophy condemned by Mao as "feudal" and which can be
   quasi-religious. Since 2004 China has sponsored dozens of "Confucius
   Institutes" around the world, including America and Europe, to promote
   the study of Chinese language and culture.

   In the countryside the revival of traditional values has needed little
   encouragement. Clan shrines, where ancestors are worshipped, have
   sprung up in many rural areas, particularly in prosperous coastal and
   southern regions. The revival of clan identity (in many villages a
   substantial minority, if not a majority, of inhabitants have the same
   surname, which they trace back to a common ancestor) has had a
   profound impact on village politics. Those elected as village leader
   often owe much of their authority to a senior position in the clan
   hierarchy. Control of the ancestral shrine confers enormous power. It
   is often clan chiefs, rather than party officials, who mediate
   disputes. The shrine will lend money for business ventures--so long as
   the recipient has the right name.

   Where Christianity is a feminist issue

   Ironically, the growth of clan power has helped to fuel the growth of
   Christianity in some parts of the countryside. In a village in the
   eastern province of Shandong, the wife of a former party secretary was
   a Protestant who attended prayer meetings with her female friends.
   Their religious enthusiasm was apparently fuelled by the subordinate
   role of women in the clan. A married woman is expected to revere only
   her husband's ancestors but is excluded from his clan hierarchy. The
   fast growing house-church communities often disapprove of ancestor
   worship, thus attracting women who feel fettered by clan strictures.

   The parlous state of China's health-care system has also given a
   powerful boost to religion. Falun Gong owed much of its success in the
   1990s to claims that it could heal without the need for medicine
   (cash-strapped state-run hospitals usually sell medicines to patients
   at inflated prices in order to boost their revenues). In the village
   of Donglu in Hebei Province, about 140km south of Beijing, Catholic
   nuns have set up a three-storey clinic where they offer ophthalmic,
   dental and pediatric services for what they say is a fifth of the
   price of government-run clinics or private ones run for profit. A
   picture of Jesus is pasted to the wall in the operating theatre.

   An apparition of Mary is said to have occurred in Donglu in 1900 when
   local Catholics were fighting off an assault by members of the
   fanatical Boxer cult trying to destroy their church. This has made the
   village a site of great devotion for Catholics. Every May for the past
   decade, the police have cordoned off Donglu to prevent thousands of
   Catholic pilgrims making their way to the village to celebrate the
   feast of Mary. Many of the pilgrims are loyal to an underground church
   which claims closer ties with Rome than the state-approved Catholic
   church. Yet for all Donglu's sensitivity, the local government appears
   content to let Catholics run the hospital, which is a key public
   service.

   Chinese officials are even urging religious organisations to learn
   from Hong Kong, where religious groups run many schools and hospitals.
   In late November, Ye Xiaowen, the head of the State Administration of
   Religious Affairs which oversees the five officially recognised
   religions, said that religious groups had helped reinforce social
   stability in the former British colony with their contribution to
   public services. The Archbishop of Canterbury, Rowan Williams, who
   visited China in October, wrote afterwards in the Times that there was
   now a sense in China that civil society needed religion, with its
   motivated volunteers. During his trip he remarked on an "astonishing
   and quite unpredictable explosion" in Christian numbers in China in
   recent years.

   The party still mouths its alarmist rhetoric about what it says are
   foreign efforts to use religion as a means of undermining the party's
   grip on power. Yet the appointment of Pope Benedict XVI, following the
   death in 2005 of John Paul II who was seen by China as a more die-hard
   anti-communist, has encouraged tentative efforts by China to restore
   the ties with the Vatican that were severed in 1951.

   Last month the Vatican decided to appoint a commission to handle
   Chinese relations. But progress has been far from smooth. On November
   30th, much to the Vatican's annoyance, China's state-backed Catholic
   church appointed a bishop without the Vatican's prior approval for the
   third time that year. Since 2000 China had done so only with the
   Vatican's tacit assent. In August, however, China released a bishop
   loyal to the underground church, An Shuxin, who had been arrested a
   decade earlier after leading celebrations of the feast of Mary in
   Donglu.

                                                                      AFP
                                                                      AFP

                                   Worshipping behind a shield of incense

   An even more tentative rapprochement is under way with the Dalai Lama.
   Since 2002, China has held five rounds of talks with his
   representatives, most recently last February. But China retains
   profound fears that the Dalai Lama's real intention is to separate
   Tibet, and adjoining areas, from China (see [4]article).
   Notwithstanding the government's suspicions, Tibetan Buddhism has
   acquired a certain chic in Chinese cities in recent years, with some
   urbanites regarding it as spiritually more pure than Chinese-style
   Buddhism, which has strong links to the government.

   Within its own ranks, the party knows that some members practise
   religion even though this is against the party's rules. Falun Gong
   claimed many adherents among party members in the 1990s. In the
   countryside, party secretaries routinely take part in religious
   ceremonies. Mr Wang at the Black Dragon is not a party member, but in
   other villages in the region temple chiefs double up as village party
   bosses. If the party is still trying to keep its members atheist, it
   is fighting a losing battle.

   One result of allowing religion to play a bigger role in providing
   education could be that the party finds its efforts to inculcate its
   ideology among the nation's youth becoming ever more frustrated. In
   Hongliutan, the temple-sponsored middle school attracts many boarders
   from the town--a reversal of the normal flow of village pupils to the
   towns. Thanks to the temple's sponsorship, the middle school's fees
   are half of what they would be at a government school, teachers say.
   With this sort of discount, the popularity and influence of the Black
   Dragon, and other such spiritual beasts, seems certain to spread.

