
   Small farmers lose their livelihoods to corrupt officials

   ONE day in December, 70-year-old Doung Moeurn and her neighbours
   arrived to work on their rice paddies to find soldiers putting up a
   barbed-wire fence around them. As in China, across Cambodia growing
   numbers of small farmers and slum-dwellers have fallen victim to
   land-grabbing.

   The country's rapid economic growth in recent years has meant that
   land, having hitherto been almost worthless, is now a
   fast-appreciating asset. Almost any Cambodian with a bit of spare cash
   is taking a speculative punt, snapping up a chunk of land in the hope
   of easy profits. Small farmers, and poor people living in shacks in
   the towns and cities, usually have no proof that they own their land
   or homes. This makes it easy for the speculators--often politicians,
   civil servants or army brass--to work the corrupt legal system to take
   the ground from under their feet.

   Public anger over land grabs has risen to the point where the prime
   minister, Hun Sen, an elected strongman, is having to distance himself
   from those among the upper ranks of his Cambodian People's Party who
   are the worst culprits. On March 5th Mr Hun Sen publicly rebuked them
   for ruining the party's reputation, and gave them a "last chance" to
   abandon their dodgy land deals or be sacked. An unnamed army general
   was being demoted for disobeying this order, he said. Others, he
   thundered in his typically no-nonsense style, may face an even worse
   fate: "I really don't want bloodshed, but if you still fail to obey
   me, blood must flow."

   Doung Moeurn says her family had been farming their patch of earth, in
   the rural province of Kompong Speu, since 1979. They have complained
   to the authorities, but so far to no avail. As they point out the
   offending fence and the guard-post with dozing soldiers at one corner
   of it, the head of a nearby village, whose people also lost land,
   turns up. He says he went to the provincial court the previous day but
   was told it could do nothing to help.

   Roth Thawy, from the local office of ADHOC, a human-rights group, says
   the villagers' case was one of 33 land-grabbing complaints received
   from across Kompong Speu last year. Mr Roth Thawy said he went to the
   nearby army base to find out why its soldiers had fenced off the
   villagers' land. A senior officer told him it was needed for
   unspecified military purposes. Some of his troops, however, said they
   had heard the land was being sold on to a businessman. Sometimes, say
   ADHOC's campaigners, farmers do get compensation, but usually only a
   pittance.

   Cambodia is recovering slowly from the chaos left by the communist
   Khmer Rouge regime of 1975-79 and the civil war that followed its
   collapse. A 1989 law allows those who occupy land for at least five
   years to claim ownership. But so far only a small fraction of the
   millions of rural households entitled to claim the deeds to their land
   have actually received them.

   The World Bank is helping the government to speed up the issuing of
   deeds, but it worries that landlessness is still getting worse. About
   a fifth of rural households now have no land, it reckons, while much
   land, snapped up by speculators, sits idle. Land-grabbing is only part
   of the problem: other causes include population growth and the
   increasing demand for land for industry and large-scale plantations.
   Even those small farmers still in possession of their land are
   reluctant to put time and money into improving it. This means that
   agricultural output is lower--and poverty higher--than they should be.

   Land-grabbing cases are popping up all over the country, even at Boeng
   Kak lake, right behind the government's information ministry in the
   capital, Phnom Penh. Over 4,000 families face eviction from their
   lakeside shacks by developers who have signed a deal with the
   municipality to drain the lake and build over it. Whatever the 1989
   law says, the ill-educated poor are usually defeated by the
   well-connected rich in any legal battle.

   Will Mr Hun Sen keep his promise to rein in his land-grabbing
   apparatchiks? ADHOC's national leader, Thun Saray, is sceptical: he
   says the prime minister often promises big reforms but fails to
   deliver. In other countries with land conflicts--Brazil is a prime
   example--powerful landless peasants' movements can whip up big, angry
   protests that force the government to act. Cambodia does not have one
   of these: at least, not yet.

