
                                                                       AP

                                     AP

   The stadiums, transport, ticketing, air pollution and even the weather
   are under control; shame about the people


   WITH exactly a year to go, the organisers of next year's Beijing
   Olympic games on August 8th set their countdown clock ticking in
   earnest--and in grand style, with a three-hour, nationally televised
   song-and-dance extravaganza in Tiananmen Square. Lest there were any
   doubt at all as to the intended message, the glitzy show featured a
   purpose-written anthem entitled "We are ready!"

   In discussing their readiness, Chinese officials seem most keen to
   talk about the impressive collection of new and renovated sports
   venues that will house the competitions, such as the National Stadium
   (above), and the equally impressive array of new roads, railways, and
   metro lines that will ferry the massive crush of spectators and
   athletes around the chronically congested city. Other logistics seem
   likewise well in hand. The ticketing programme, organisers say, is
   proceeding smoothly. And although officials think they will need
   100,000 volunteers to help run the games, they have already received
   more than 560,000 applications.

   On the hardware side of the ledger, and especially when it comes to
   the venues themselves, it would seem every detail has indeed been
   attended to. Not only will all 37 venues be completed well in advance,
   officials promise, but they will be ready for any contingency. What
   if, for example, rain threatens to turn the Olympic beach-volleyball
   court into a mud pit? Never fear: after scouring the nation and
   testing different sand varieties for their water drainage properties,
   planners have located the very finest grains on distant Hainan island,
   and shipped 17,000 tonnes to Beijing.

   Despite the choking, hazy, smog-laden pall that has hung over Beijing
   for much of this summer, planners are also likely to succeed in
   bringing Beijing's notorious air pollution down to more bearable
   levels during the games. If, to achieve this or ease road congestion,
   they have to impose draconian restrictions on traffic and industrial
   activity in the weeks before the games, they will have the authority
   they need to do so. Even the weather is taken care of. Officials at
   Beijing's municipal Weather Modification Office say the timely
   launching of chemicals into the atmosphere will allow them to dispel
   clouds and largely control the time and place of rainfall.

   The government seems far less prepared, however, when it comes to the
   delicate business of handling the activists and pressure groups that
   are sure to use the event as a soapbox for their many and varied
   criticisms of its policies. Whether to do with labour rights,
   religious freedom, the mistreatment of ethnic minorities or general
   political repression, there is no shortage of causes, and no shortage
   of champions prepared to take advantage of the Olympic spotlight.

   The city already had a foretaste of this in the week marking the
   launch of the one-year countdown. At the Great Wall, on the outskirts
   of Beijing, a group of Tibetans from Britain, Canada and America
   displayed a huge banner proclaiming, "One World, One Dream, Free Tibet
   2008". The slogan plays on Beijing's official Olympic motto, "One
   World, One Dream". A similar protest was mounted (and a similar banner
   unfurled) in April, at the Mount Everest base camp in Tibet.

   In central Beijing, meanwhile, another international pressure group,
   Reporters Without Borders, conducted a small but colourful
   demonstration on August 6th outside the Olympic headquarters, accusing
   China of doing little to honour the promises it has been making about
   press and political freedom since it was chosen in 2001 to host the
   games. At the start of the year the foreign ministry instituted new
   and more liberal rules for foreign journalists working in China. It
   seems not, however, to have informed all the police. At the
   demonstration on August 6th, some foreign reporters were roughed up
   and detained on the spot for an hour.

   The government this week repeated its "resolute opposition to the
   politicisation of the Olympics". But it is not only foreign critics of
   China who are testing that resolve. In a brave open letter, a group of
   prominent Chinese activists and intellectuals--former political
   prisoners among them--took their own liberties with the official
   slogan. Entitled "One World, One Dream, Universal Human Rights", the
   letter was addressed to China's leaders as well as heads of
   international organisations including the United Nations and the
   International Olympic Committee.

   "We find no consolation or comfort", wrote the dissidents, "in the
   rise of grandiose sports facilities, or a temporarily beautified
   Beijing city, or the prospect of Chinese athletes winning medals. We
   know too well how these glories are built on the ruins of the lives of
   ordinary people."

   Such a letter is cause for concern for China's leadership, for more
   reasons than one. Not only does it give the lie to any argument that
   agitation over human rights is limited to meddling, ill-intentioned
   foreigners, but it also signals that the internal propaganda
   objectives of the Olympic endeavour may not be so easy to meet as had
   seemed likely.

   Much of the world assumes--with justification--that China hopes to use
   the games as a global coming-out party, raising its international
   profile and softening its image. But another important goal is to
   convey to the domestic audience that China has the stature and ability
   to take its place at the centre of the world stage. Neither goal will
   be well served next year by ham-fisted responses to criticism.

