
   Rivalries between caste and ethnic groups threaten the peace process


   IN THE benign view of many Nepalis, their country's 100 or so ethnic
   and caste groups have co-existed for centuries in remarkable peace and
   harmony. A new crop of ethnically-based groups, however, see things
   very differently. For them, the history of Nepal is one of remarkably
   successful and sustained discrimination. As the country of 28m people
   edges towards a solution to ten years of Maoist insurgency, these
   ancient cracks are being exposed.

   Since the beginning of the year, a succession of previously
   little-known organisations have vied to bring Nepal to a standstill.
   First came the Madhesi movement, some half a dozen competing groups
   claiming to represent Nepalis from the southern plains, known as the
   Terai. At least 30 people died in three weeks of violent protests,
   mostly shot by the police.

   In Janakpur, one of the worst affected areas, locals are angry, but
   sense historic change in the offing. A radio producer compares the
   mood to that of being weighed down by a boulder on the head and unable
   to stand up. "Then she throws it off. That's the Madhesi movement."

   Next to take to the streets was the Nepal Federation of Indigenous
   Nationalities, claiming to represent various peoples from the
   Himalayan foothills, which began its own series of crippling strikes.
   Several other ethnic identities have been invoked and the noise is
   likely to grow.

   These groups want an end to domination by the two highest Hindu
   castes--Brahmins (the priestly caste) and Chhetris (warriors), who
   make up about 28% of the population. These castes have controlled the
   country since it was unified in the 18th century. Power has often
   changed hands between them, and seems to be doing so again. Street
   protests last April toppled an essentially Chhetri royal government.
   Now, a coalition government of Brahmin-dominated political parties is
   negotiating with Maoist rebels, who have exploited caste and ethnic
   grievances, but are themselves largely led by Brahmins.

   Peace hinges on elections, due in June, to an assembly set up to write
   a new constitution. There is much talk of creating a "new Nepal". Yet
   many groups fear the Maoists will simply slip in at the top of the
   existing power structure while other interests are ignored again. A
   piece of ethnic propaganda shows two images of the Maoist leader,
   known as Prachanda. In one he eats beef--a taboo for Hindus--like an
   atheist rebel. In the next he drinks cow urine, like an orthodox
   Brahmin.

   The various ethnic groups present similar, though vague, demands for
   proportional representation in the elections and an ethnic-federalist
   structure in the new constitution. The government and the Maoists have
   conceded both demands, though equally vaguely. Meanwhile promised
   negotiations with the agitators have not materialised. Doubting the
   government's sincerity, the ethnic groups are continuing their strikes
   and protests.

   The benefits of federalism and proportional representation are widely
   recognised, but hard to deliver. According to Krishna Khanal of
   Kathmandu's Tribhuvan University, Nepal's ethnic and caste groups are
   so many and so scattered that among the dozen or so states a federal
   Nepal might include it is only possible to create three with a clear
   identity.

   Lok Raj Baral, a political scientist, says that in a system of
   proportional representation some of the Brahmin politicians on whom
   the parties depend must lose out. But the agitators hold some
   important advantages--especially the Madhesis, who live in an
   economically important area and control supply routes to the capital.

   There can be no election until their grievances, and those of others,
   have been tackled. Already it seems certain that the June deadline for
   the poll will be missed, undermining the peace process. The
   uncertainty gives greater influence to minor players, such as the
   Madhesi separatist guerrilla leader known as Jwala Singh, who is at
   present in hiding. Like many of the new breed, Mr Singh is a former
   Maoist. He accuses his former comrades of not taking a clear stand on
   Madhesi rights. Mr Singh has the armed strength to scare people and
   order killings but, in an interview, he implied that he would drop his
   separatist demands in exchange for recognition and a seat at the
   table. Two other violent Madhesi groups have recently emerged. They,
   too, seem to see a chance to spoil the peace process or wring
   concessions from the government.

   The biggest losers from the rise of ethnic politics are the Maoists.
   They have seen ethnic supporters who backed them during the conflict
   drift away as they draw closer to national power. They have responded
   by attacking their Madhesi rivals.

   In daily thuggery the Maoists show that, ceasefire or not, they still
   rely on violence. They have set the example for the new batch of
   politicians. That makes it even harder to achieve a feat not tried
   since 1999, but essential if Nepal is to move on from the bloody
   decline of the past ten years: holding elections that are both
   peaceful and inclusive.

