
   Economic advance is not winning all that many hearts and minds

   IT WAS an odd remark to come from a Chinese government official.
   Instead of flaunting the 13.2% growth that his autonomous region
   reportedly achieved in 2006, he was openly contemptuous of the
   calculations: "The officials tell us what incomes Beijing wants us to
   report and then we just have to report those numbers, even though
   there are farmers earning far less." Worse, he has views on the limits
   of Chinese sovereignty. "Highest this in China, highest that in
   China," he says, in a caustic imitation of Chinese tour guides.
   "This," he declares, a hand sweeping out towards the mountain-circled
   horizon, "is not China. This is Tibet."

   He may work for the Chinese government, but he is an ethnic Tibetan
   and, like many others, he is intransigently opposed to all things
   Chinese. His motives in working for the party are purely mercenary:
   "It's the highest paying job I can get." He also admits that he would
   like to visit India to see the Dalai Lama, Tibet's exiled spiritual
   leader. But, for now, he must earn money.

   His is a common tale in modern Tibet: even as they take advantage of
   some of the economic opportunities Chinese rule has brought, many
   Tibetans remain staunchly proud of their own culture. This belies
   Chinese propaganda portraying supporters of the Dalai Lama and Tibetan
   separatism as a dwindling minority.

   On the other hand, the official's story does not quite fit the image
   of modern Tibet fostered by China's critics. In their version,
   economic growth benefits only ethnic Han Chinese. China embarked in
   2000 on a drive to accelerate development in its backward western
   regions, including Tibet. Since then, and especially since last year
   when a railway to Lhasa was completed, pessimists have been mourning
   in advance the death of Tibetans' unique Buddhist culture and
   identity.

   Economic growth, it was argued, would bring a flood of Han Chinese
   immigrants, who would "Hanify" Tibet and murder its culture. But just
   as that culture survived China's invasion in 1950, the flight of the
   Dalai Lama in 1959 and the devastation of the Cultural Revolution in
   the 1960s and 1970s, so it is now resisting the subtler ravages
   wrought by economic progress.

   China's western development policy in part reflects the government's
   belief that economic growth would quench demands for greater political
   liberty. If Tibetans grew richer, surely they would become friendlier
   to life under Chinese rule? And, indeed, some Tibetans are sharing the
   new wealth. Lhasa has become a magnet for Tibetans from across the
   plateau, drawn by the opportunities created there by the booming
   tourist industry for guides, vendors and hotel workers. Scholarships
   take Tibetan students to universities in Beijing and Shanghai.

   Even outside Lhasa, some Tibetans acknowledge that Chinese economic
   policies have brought benefits. In the northern town of Nagqu, for
   example, nomadic herders now have houses to shelter them from the icy
   winter, thanks to economic progress and government aid. Recognising
   Tibetan poverty, the government recently announced that it would offer
   aid to more than 230,000 farmers and herdsmen. The statistics are
   fudged and many Tibetans are still desperately poor, but on the whole
   they are better off than they once were.

   Tibetan tradition has not survived unscathed. Some young people are
   abandoning nomadic life for lucrative urban jobs. Unworldly lamas now
   boast Nike caps. As one bitter gentleman puts it, "there are those who
   have sold out to the Chinese."

   But if the true index of a culture's vitality is its adherence to its
   language, historical memory and religious traditions, Tibetan culture
   shows itself durable. Loyalty to the Dalai Lama, the Tibetan language
   and a view of history in which the Chinese are illegitimate invaders
   will not die soon. Each year, thousands sneak across the border and
   receive "religious and cultural training" from the Dalai Lama's
   government-in-exile. Those who return pass the lessons to their
   compatriots.

   Many of those who do not risk the journey to India work hard at
   preserving their Tibetan heritage. One mother says that she insists
   that her daughter learn Tibetan, and that many others do the same.
   "Chinese is important for work but Tibetan is who we are. If you come
   back to Lhasa in ten years, you'll see many more people speaking
   Chinese. But they would still be Tibetan."

   Such ideas pose no immediate security threat to China. But their
   persistence in the face of genuine danger highlights the limitations
   of Chinese rule. China has, through force, won reluctant submission.
   Acceptance, however, cannot be bought.

