
   Confusion over who calls the shots in Beijing. But not in Hong Kong


   AFTER meeting China's president, Hu Jintao, last month, America's
   defence secretary, Robert Gates, left Beijing with promises of greater
   co-operation between the two armies, including the installation of a
   hotline. But China's top brass is not making it easy to fulfil Mr Hu's
   hopes of growing friendship. A fortnight later it unexpectedly
   cancelled a Thanksgiving Day port call in Hong Kong by Kitty Hawk, an
   American aircraft-carrier, and several other vessels.

   The incident has again raised questions about how much China's army
   tells its civilian leaders. In January the foreign ministry was caught
   off-guard by the army's test of an anti-satellite weapon. This
   recalled the confusion in 2001 after an American spy plane had
   collided with a Chinese fighter.

   Similar confusion appears to have broken out again. The White House
   said China's foreign minister, Yang Jiechi, had told George Bush that
   the Kitty Hawk incident had been a "misunderstanding". A
   foreign-ministry spokesman in Beijing soon denied this. But he gave no
   explanation. On December 4th the foreign ministry returned to the
   fray, expressing "grave concern" over the Kitty Hawk's decision to
   sail back to Japan through the Taiwan Strait, purportedly because of
   the weather. American carriers normally avoid the strait in deference
   to China's sensitivities.

   China's military or civilian officials had reasons to express
   displeasure with America: a high-profile meeting in October between
   President Bush and the Dalai Lama; or the Pentagon's plans to help
   Taiwan upgrade its missile defences. They may also have wanted to keep
   prying American eyes away from big wargames China was staging in the
   region.

   Or maybe they just wanted to teach America who is in charge in Hong
   Kong these days. Hong Kong's democrats need no reminding of this.
   Their champion, Anson Chan, a former top civil servant, won a
   by-election on December 2nd in a fiercely contested race with a
   Beijing-backed candidate, Regina Ip. Mrs Chan's campaign platform
   called for full democracy in Hong Kong in 2012. But voters know this
   is a pipedream. As China sees it, sovereignty over Hong Kong includes
   the right to rig elections as well as to keep American warships
   guessing.

