
   A vote to abolish the monarchy gives Nepal a better, but not certain,
   hope of peace

   IN CLEAR wintry light, shining on the snowy tops of the distant
   Himalayas, a few hundred Hindu ascetics and others gathered in a
   Kathmandu park on January 7th to protest against the impending
   abolition of Nepal's 240-year-old monarchy. It was consigned to
   oblivion on December 23rd, in an almost unanimous vote of the
   country's parliament. This was momentous--even if the vote left it for
   the next assembly, due to be elected in April, to confirm the
   sentence. Yet, apart from the one small protest, which ended after
   some gentle placard-waving, there has been no whisper of public
   demurral.

   One explanation for this docility is that most Nepalis agree with
   parliament. Few modern monarchs have blundered so royally as Nepal's
   incumbent, King Gyanendra, who seized absolute power in 2005 and was
   forced by mass protests to return it the following year. He is also
   popularly believed--without evidence--to have been involved in the
   murder of his brother, the previous king, in 2001. Many Nepalis seem
   ambivalent about kings in general; but almost all want to see the back
   of this one.

   There is, however, another, less positive, explanation for the public
   apathy about the monarchy's future. After a year of quarrelsome and
   ineffective government--including two cancelled elections--many
   Nepalis doubt that their leaders will deliver what they promise. The
   government of Girija Prasad Koirala, an octogenarian four-time prime
   minister, is charged above all with bringing a lasting end to a nasty
   decade-long civil war, for which elections are considered crucial.

   The looming poll, to produce an assembly that will rewrite Nepal's
   constitution, was last due in November. It was postponed when Maoists,
   one side in the inconclusive civil war, withdrew from the government.
   They reasonably feared electoral defeat. That would have been a
   demoralising blow for their cadres, including some 23,000 former
   combatants, languishing in makeshift camps under UN supervision. Late
   last year the Maoists rejoined the government. The abolition of the
   monarchy was part of their price. All eight political parties that
   form the interim government promised to begin campaigning for the
   election. According to Baburam Bhattarai, the Maoists' deputy leader,
   there is "no question" of another delay.

   Leaders of the other parties agree that further delay would be
   disastrous. Yet, in private, almost all expect it. First, they say,
   the Maoists are sure to back out again. They also point to insecurity
   in the southern Terai region, home to around 40% of Nepalis. In the
   past year, 130 people have been killed there in complicated and
   worsening ethnic and caste-based violence.

   Meanwhile, Nepalis--who are among Asia's poorest--are having a
   miserable time. Annual economic growth, of about 2%, is barely keeping
   pace with the population. In a war-enfeebled state, crime is
   everywhere on the rise. In Kathmandu, a haven from much of the misery,
   people feel especially disgruntled, because their protests brought
   this government to power. Further stagnation, many feel, could lead to
   another sudden change: an army takeover--perhaps disguised behind a
   civilian façade--may be the likeliest sort.

   Indeed, the monarchist army chief, General Rookmangud Katwal, this
   week struck a jarring note. Egged on by India, which fears a Maoist
   takeover above all, he declared that no former Maoist fighter would be
   allowed to join the army. Rather feebly, Mr Koirala seconded him--to
   the irritation of the Maoists, who want all of their cadres inducted
   into a new national army. They have a point: they voluntarily ended
   the war, while in control of much of Nepal. But, loth to return to the
   jungle, the Maoists might settle for much less: army posts for a few
   hundred former insurgents, perhaps, and jobs for the rest.

   In fact, there may be no big problem that the government could not
   settle. Tribal militiamen in the Terai might accept a more modest
   bribe. But to offer such compromises, strong leadership is needed. Mr
   Koirala, as he inhales from the oxygen tank that is keeping his ailing
   body alive, needs to ponder that.

