
   Ethnic violence threatens Nepal's new-found peace


   THE peace process in Nepal passed important landmarks this month as
   former Maoist rebels joined an interim parliament and started putting
   their guns into storage. Yet even as a final settlement to that
   insurgency remains distant, the country is faced with another cause of
   violence: ethnic strife in its southern plains next to India, a region
   known as the Terai.

   The two conflicts are connected. Ten years of Maoist insurgency have
   made many Nepalis more assertive and convinced some of the merits of
   political violence. Also, the peace process will involve a
   constitutional assembly, for which elections are due in June. The
   ethnic group known as Madhesis, who dominate the Terai, fear they will
   be cheated.

   Nepal's censuses have always underestimated Madhesi numbers.
   Ethnically and culturally, they are indistinguishable from the Indians
   across the border. They probably make up more than 40% of the
   population but are barely represented in the bureaucracy, army or
   police and their "Nepaliness" is constantly questioned. Ahead of the
   elections there is a drive to give millions of Madhesis the
   citizenship they lack, allowing them to vote. But Madhesi politicians
   complain that constituencies are gerrymandered so that "one hill vote
   is equal to 20 Terai votes".

   The Terai is volatile. A breakaway faction of ex-Maoists, the Terai
   People's Liberation Front, is waging a violent campaign for
   independence. In December a campaign for Madhesi rights in the town of
   Nepalganj turned into communal violence as hill-people sacked and
   burnt Madhesi businesses in a two-day spree, condoned by the local
   authorities. This week there were demonstrations, daylong curfews and
   five deaths in the central Terai after a Maoist shot dead a Madhesi
   protester.

   Fanning the flames is the monarchy, all-powerful a year ago in what
   was the world's only Hindu kingdom, but now at risk of abolition. By
   sowing communal tension, the palace may hope to postpone the election.
   Consistent accounts place royal agents in the Terai stirring things
   up, as well as in India, appealing to religious fanatics by linking
   the future of Hinduism, Madhesis and the royal family. Hridesh
   Tripathi, a cabinet minister who leads a Terai-based party, says it is
   to be expected that the palace "will use all forms of conspiracy". The
   Madhesis' grievances give the plotters some fertile ground.

