
   By electing allies of the deposed prime minister, Thaksin Shinawatra,
   Thais have voted against the 2006 coup. But the country's worries are
   not over yet 

                                                                      EPA

                                    EPA


   IN STARK contrast to the terrible political violence in Pakistan and
   Kenya, Thailand's election, on December 23rd, was mostly peaceful. It
   also, notwithstanding perennial complaints of vote-buying, seemed
   largely fair. More remarkably, the military chiefs who deposed the
   government of Thaksin Shinawatra in a coup in 2006 seemed to accept
   the public's decision to overrule the coup and restore Mr Thaksin's
   allies to power in the form of the People's Power Party (PPP), a
   reincarnation of his disbanded Thai Rak Thai (TRT).

   Mr Thaksin, too, has struck a conciliatory note. This week he said he
   would return from exile soon and invite the coupmakers to a round of
   golf. "For the sake of the country's reconciliation", he would meet
   his nemesis, General Prem Tinsulanonda, the chief adviser to King
   Bhumibol, and the man widely presumed to be the mastermind behind the
   coup.

   If so, Thailand may emerge from two years of political strife and
   regain its former status as a beacon of multi-party democracy in Asia.
   Until recently such an outcome had seemed improbable. In October a
   memo came to light detailing the junta's plans, through spreading
   black propaganda and fomenting anti-Thaksin protests, to subvert the
   election to thwart a PPP victory. However, embarrassed by the plan's
   discovery, and perhaps disheartened by months of unpopularity, the
   junta seems to have dropped the plan and let the people decide.

   A potential spanner in the works is a decision by the Election
   Commission, due later this month, on which winning candidates will be
   disqualified for electoral malpractice. Early in the campaign the
   commission announced absurdly stringent regulations, raising fears it
   might apply them partially, to disqualify PPP candidates, or indeed
   the entire party, on flimsy grounds. The commission later absolved the
   junta over its plot to subvert the election, arguing that the
   conspiracy had not been enacted and thus no harm was done. If it is
   consistent it will judge poll-fraud allegations by the same yardstick,
   disqualifying elected members only if their rule-breaking may have
   altered the results. Early this week there were signs of splits in the
   commission, with one of its members saying he wanted to quit.

   It had been widely assumed that the PPP would get the most seats but
   not enough to prevent its main rival, the Democrat party, from forming
   a governing coalition. However, the Thaksinites did better than
   expected, winning 233 seats, only eight short of a majority in the
   480-seat lower house (see chart). This was in spite of a recent change
   to the electoral system--to merge single-seat constituencies into ones
   returning up to three members--that seemed designed to encourage Mr
   Thaksin's supporters to spread their votes around other parties. As
   the extent of the PPP's victory became clear on election night, Samak
   Sundaravej, Mr Thaksin's stand-in as party leader, insisted he would
   be prime minister. By the middle of this week it seemed as if the PPP
   had persuaded most or all of the five minor parties that won seats to
   join its coalition. This would give it a big enough majority to
   withstand all but an extravagant number of disqualifications.

   Mr Thaksin took full advantage of his crushing majority in the last
   parliament, pushing his cronies into key institutional jobs while
   scorning his critics. His allies' new government may not have it so
   easy. For one thing, the Democrats emerged stronger from the election,
   gaining 165 seats, up from 96 in the 2005 election (when the lower
   house had 500 seats), so they should provide more effective
   opposition. Furthermore, a new constitution narrowly approved in a
   referendum in August strengthens the checks and balances against an
   over-mighty executive. This includes a dubious change in which some
   Senate members will be appointed by judges and officials (the rest
   will be elected, probably in March).

   Ideally the PPP-led government would offer the advantages of the
   previous TRT ones--sound macroeconomic management and policies to aid
   poor rural villagers--without the disadvantages, such as Mr Thaksin's
   autocratic tendencies and conflicts of interest. To boost flagging
   economic growth and weak investment, confidence in the stability and
   competence of government needs to be restored swiftly.

   Samak the knife

   However, Thailand's political strife may not yet be over. Mr Samak,
   abrasive and uncouth, may prove an even more divisive prime minister
   than Mr Thaksin. Mr Samak is a staunch royalist but he is also a foe
   of General Prem, so it cannot be guaranteed that the generals and the
   Thaksinites will kiss and make up, especially since Mr Samak wants to
   lift Mr Thaksin's five-year ban from politics, and halt the corruption
   inquiries the coupmakers instigated against him. Mr Thaksin insists he
   has retired from politics but not everyone believes he will keep his
   word. If he or close relatives take top jobs in the new
   administration, and especially if he uses his restored power to seek
   revenge on the coupmakers, he risks renewed street protests and a
   reaction from the army's hardliners.

   In the absence of such a disaster, history may look kindly on the
   perpetrators of Thailand's 18th coup since the end of absolute
   monarchy in 1932. They spilled no blood and kept their promise to
   restore democracy promptly. But they and their supporters would have
   been more nefarious had Thai public opinion not stopped them: they
   tried to insert a clause in the new constitution granting themselves
   sweeping powers in the event of a political conflict, and then tried
   to achieve the same by means of an ordinary law, which the
   military-appointed interim assembly watered down before passing last
   month.

   The generals signally failed to prove the claims of "rampant
   corruption" and other misdeeds by Mr Thaksin used to justify the coup.
   Worse, they did nothing to correct the most heinous abuses of his
   administration: extrajudicial killings by police during a 2003 "war on
   drugs" and two massacres in 2004 of Muslim protesters by security
   forces in Thailand's troubled south. The junta and those among the
   fickle Bangkok elite who excused the coup should have learned their
   lesson that extra-constitutional excursions do not solve problems.
   That, however, may be too much to hope.

