
   The election will probably happen. But who will respect the result? 


   PAKISTANIS are slightly relieved. Exactly a month before polling day,
   the largest of the parties that had been refusing to contest the
   country's controversial general election, due on January 8th 2008,
   called off its boycott. This was the Pakistan Muslim League (N) headed
   by a former prime minister, Nawaz Sharif. Another former prime
   minister, Benazir Bhutto, and Maulana Fazal ur Rehman, the senior
   partner in the five-party clerical alliance, Muttahida Majlis Amal
   (MMA), had earlier decided to take part, leaving Mr Sharif with the
   choice of following suit, or risking political isolation.

   The unpopular president, Pervez Musharraf, took a huge risk in calling
   an election which seemed likely to be seen as neither free nor fair.
   Is his poll being legitimised?

   On the face of it, it might seem so. Only two national politicians are
   boycotting the event now. One is Imran Khan, a
   cricketer-turned-politician. He barely won his seat in the last
   election, and his absence will not alter the way people perceive the
   legitimacy of the vote. The other is Qazi Hussain Ahmed, the fiery
   leader of the Jamaat-e-Islami, an Islamist party that is part of the
   MMA. He is a much more formidable figure. His refusal to participate
   will break up the MMA, which had become a significant force since
   winning 11% of the vote and about a fifth of the seats in the federal
   Parliament in 2002. It also controls two provincial governments, in
   Balochistan and the North Western Frontier. Its boycott may well
   please other parties.

   But it will not end the state of uncertainty. Opposition parties have
   banded together to accuse the caretaker government, handpicked by
   President Musharraf, of pre-poll rigging. They want the chief election
   commissioner, also appointed by Mr Musharraf, replaced and the state
   of emergency imposed on November 3rd lifted. Mr Musharraf has pledged
   to do the latter on December 15th but is in no mood to concede any
   other demand.

   But if the opposition is not sanguine about the election, neither is
   Mr Musharraf himself. Having quit as army chief on November 28th, he
   cannot rely on the army and needs his loyal supporters in the Pakistan
   Muslim League (Q) to sweep the polls in order to keep Ms Bhutto and Mr
   Sharif at bay. But various opinion polls show his rivals are leading
   the pack. One, by the Washington, DC-based International Republican
   Institute, found that 70% of Pakistanis do not think his government
   deserves re-election and 67% want him to resign immediately. This
   raises the spectre of vote-rigging, violence and even boycotts on
   polling day itself.

   That is not all. The government has given warning that
   al-Qaeda-inspired terrorists could disrupt the election by bombing
   rallies. This is not just scare-mongering: a suicide bomber attacked
   Ms Bhutto's homecoming and killed more than 140 people. She has since
   restricted her movements. The fear is that terrorist attacks might
   justify a postponement of the election, especially if the ruling party
   fears a rout. Ms Bhutto claims to be the most popular politician in
   the country. If she loses, she says, it will be because of
   vote-rigging--and she would refuse to accept such a result. Mr
   Musharraf called the election to end his country's political impasse.
   But a vote perceived as unfree and unfair might increase instability,
   not reduce it.

