
   Down to earth, even at 29,000 feet

   FEW men who find themselves cast as heroes early in life continue to
   command universal esteem till the end. Sir Edmund Hillary was one. To
   be the first to reach the top of the world's highest mountain ensured
   international celebrity and a place in history, but the modesty of a
   slightly gauche New Zealand beekeeper never departed him. Nor was
   mountaineering, or indeed apiculture, his only accomplishment.

                                                                  Reuters

                                  Reuters

                             Sherpa and friend

   Two views are often expressed about his life. One is that conquering
   Everest was everything. No one would play down the role of Tenzing
   Norgay, the Sherpa who reached the peak with him, possibly even before
   him; their partnership was like that of Ginger Rogers and Fred
   Astaire. But it was Sir Edmund who first wriggled his way up a crack
   in the 12-metre (40-foot) rockface that had to be overcome after the
   south summit if the real one was to be achieved, and below which only
   oblivion awaited.

   News of the British-led expedition's triumph on May 29th 1953 reached
   the world through a report in the London Times four days later. The
   Times, a sponsor of the expedition, had used an elaborate code to
   outwit any rivals monitoring the radio waves. Its scoop was indeed a
   coup: June 2nd was the day of Queen Elizabeth's coronation.

   Sir Edmund was a man of action. After Everest came more expeditions in
   Nepal, a race to the South Pole and further adventures in the
   Antarctic, the Himalayas and India. But for some onlookers neither
   these nor even the Everest expedition was especially remarkable:
   fitness and physical courage are all very well, they argued, but the
   world's highest peak was simply waiting to be scaled, and a steady
   traffic nowadays makes its way to the top unnoticed, except for the
   litter it leaves.

   Both the dismissive and the awe-struck, however, agree that Sir
   Edmund's other life was wholly admirable, and he himself said he was
   prouder of it than of anything else. This was his tireless work for
   the Sherpas, of whom he had become so fond. Through his efforts, and
   those of Tenzing, hospitals, clinics, bridges, airstrips and nearly 30
   schools have been built in the Solo Khumbu region of Nepal just south
   of Everest. If New Zealand claimed Sir Edmund's loyalty, Nepal, and
   especially its Sherpas, could surely claim his heart.

