
   America blunders into Taiwan's electoral politics


   SELDOM do Taiwan's two big political parties find anything to agree
   on. But they are at present united in condemning recent American
   pronouncements on Taiwan. So when George Bush met his Chinese
   counterpart, Hu Jintao, in Sydney on September 6th, the Taiwanese were
   especially concerned at what he might say.

   At issue is a referendum planned to coincide with presidential
   elections in Taiwan in March next year. It would seek support for a
   doomed attempt to join the United Nations as "Taiwan", rather than
   "the Republic of China", under which name it lost its seat to China in
   1971. China--and, it seems, America--regard the referendum as the thin
   end of a wedge. The fat end would be a Taiwanese declaration of
   independence from China.

   At worst, Mr Bush might have repeated a recent statement from a member
   of his National Security Council, Dennis Wilder, that Taiwan could not
   join the UN because "it is not at this point a state in the
   international community". In fact, the issue seems simply to have been
   ignored. But that, too, was depressing for Taiwan, given the
   importance of the referendum. America is a vital ally. But the latest
   debate has brought relations to a low ebb.

   Eager to build his legacy before he steps down in May next year,
   Taiwan's president, Chen Shui-bian, has aggressively, if unavailingly,
   pursued membership for Taiwan in international organisations. He has
   defended this policy as necessary to break out of diplomatic
   isolation. For 14 years Taiwan has vainly been applying for UN
   membership under the name "Republic of China". Mr Chen launched the
   new bid in July and has backed it with a public-relations campaign
   that will culminate in a mass rally on September 15th, three days
   before the annual session of the UN General Assembly.

   The referendum is in part designed to win votes for Mr Chen's
   Democratic Progressive Party (DPP) in presidential and legislative
   elections. The DPP's roots are in the Taiwan independence movement,
   though in office it has toned down its rhetoric. The main opposition
   Nationalist party, the Kuomintang or KMT, favours eventual unification
   with China, which is not popular with voters. To limit any political
   damage from the DPP's referendum, the KMT has proposed one of its own,
   to ask whether Taiwan should use "pragmatic and flexible strategies"
   to rejoin international bodies such as the UN.

   China has never renounced what it says is its right to "reunify"
   Taiwan by force, and in 2005 enshrined this in an "Anti-Secession
   Law". In the past, when angered by Taiwan's manoeuvring, China has
   rattled its sabre, with the unintended consequence of boosting support
   for the DPP. This year, however, China has largely remained calm, but
   for some pointed references to the Anti-Secession Law.

   In fact it was America's opposition to the referendum that brought the
   debate to life in Taiwan. Tired of the political bickering, and
   doubtful about Mr Chen's leadership, the Taiwanese public showed
   little interest until last month. Then John Negroponte, a deputy
   secretary of state, said the referendum was a mistake and that America
   considered it a step towards a declaration of independence.

   Just as China has learned in the past, however, such criticism of
   moves towards de jure independence can backfire. America's reaction
   has convinced the DPP, already sceptical of the depth of American
   support for Taiwan, that it has nothing to lose by pursuing a campaign
   that is bound to harm ties. Even so, the referendum may not give it
   the backing it wants. Under Taiwan's referendum law, the proposal
   needs more than half the 16.8m eligible voters to cast their ballots
   and more than half of those who vote to support it. Even with the
   bonus of American opposition, that may be too high a bar.

