
                                                                      AFP

                                    AFP

                            The comeback senior

   After John McCain's triumph in New Hampshire, the Republican race is
   as predictable as the weather 


   THE candidate stood at a busy intersection and shouted: "Vote for me
   or something nasty will happen to your children in the night!" Vermin
   Supreme, who campaigns with a boot on his head and a chicken necklace
   (it is not hard to get on the ballot in New Hampshire), is trying to
   make a satirical point. Politicians court support by fear-mongering,
   he says. He takes it one step further: he wants America to be prepared
   for a zombie attack.

   Mr Supreme's jokes are funnier than John McCain's. The senator from
   Arizona told the same old chestnut about two drunken Irishmen to
   several crowds in New Hampshire this week, most of whom had doubtless
   heard it before. But he won a thumping victory in the Republican
   primary, beating Mitt Romney by 37% to 32%, because Mr Supreme is
   wrong about the dangers facing America. Some of them are real. And
   many voters think Mr McCain is the man to confront them.

   He correctly predicted that invading Iraq with too few troops would
   lead to chaos. He urged George Bush to send more (and sack Donald
   Rumsfeld) while other Republicans stayed mute. Now that the president
   has belatedly followed his advice and the "surge" appears to be
   working, Mr McCain looks both bold and prescient. And though he is not
   the most electric of speakers, crowds listen to him because of who he
   is. No other candidate was tortured for years by the Vietcong, or
   refused to be freed unless his fellow prisoners were freed too. When
   Mr McCain says he will win in Iraq and pursue Osama bin Laden to the
   gates of Hell, many voters believe him.

   He also promises to restore trust in government. He says he will veto
   pork-barrel spending, a threat his Senate record makes credible. He
   says he will tackle climate change, a topic his Republican rivals have
   neglected. He also runs the most accessible campaign of any candidate.

   At town-hall meetings, he does not fob voters off with a single
   sound-bite; he lets them ask follow-up questions. And between campaign
   stops, he sits with reporters on his bus, the Straight Talk Express,
   and shoots the breeze. This not only makes him popular with hacks; it
   helps them understand him. He knows a lot about national security;
   less about economics. He argues, preposterously, that climate change
   can be curbed without spending much money. But his unknowns are known
   unknowns, to borrow a phrase from his enemy, Mr Rumsfeld.

   Mr McCain's resurgence is extraordinary. Six months ago, his campaign
   was broke and its obituary was in every paper, including this one.
   Brooke Buchanan, his spokeswoman, recalls trips in Iowa when she was
   the only other person on the bus. Now the Straight Talk Express is
   packed.

   The most disappointed Republican this week is Mr Romney, a former
   governor of Massachusetts and squillionaire businessman. Not long ago,
   he was tipped to win both Iowa and New Hampshire, where he outspent
   his rivals by huge multiples. But Mike Huckabee, an ex-governor of
   Arkansas and Baptist preacher, surged from nowhere to beat him by nine
   points in Iowa on January 3rd. Mr Romney then won Wyoming two days
   later, but since the other candidates barely contested that state, his
   victory generated little buzz.

   The Republican race is now wide open, with at least four contenders:
   Mr McCain, Mr Huckabee, Mr Romney and Rudy Giuliani, a former mayor of
   New York. Each has at least one handicap that, in any other year,
   would make it impossible for him to win the nomination. But someone
   has to.

   Mr Huckabee, who came third in New Hampshire, leads narrowly in
   national opinion polls. He is the most gifted campaigner in the
   Republican field. His speeches are folksy and witty. The son of a
   fireman, he oozes empathy for the have-nots. His support is strongest
   among evangelicals. "He's one of us," says Clarice Roseland, a
   born-again-Christian farmer's wife, adding that he is "down to earth"
   and knows what it is like to struggle. Asked about Mr Huckabee's plan
   to replace all income taxes with a national sales tax, which would
   benefit the rich and squeeze people like herself, Mrs Roseland says
   she supposes she had better read about it.

   The sweet-talking preacherman

   Mr Huckabee's weakness is that his protectionist and anti-corporate
   rhetoric appals economic conservatives. Dick Armey, a former House
   majority leader, accuses him of "feel-good conservatism", with
   policies that provide "emotional gratification" rather than results.
   Others find his religious fervour off-putting. "He thinks he is
   destined by God to be president, and I find that blasphemous," says
   Cliff Newman, a Romney supporter.

   Mr McCain's main handicap is his liberal record on immigration.
   Another problem is his age. Were he to win, he would be the oldest new
   president ever.

   Nearly all Mr Romney's policies fit with Republican orthodoxy, but
   many voters doubt his sincerity. When he ran for office in
   Massachusetts, his views on abortion and immigration were far more
   liberal than he says they are now. His rivals often mock him for
   flip-flopping. "You are the candidate of change," deadpanned Mr McCain
   during a debate.

   Mr Romney performs well on television, but stiffly on the stump.
   ("Robots are people, too," reads a hostile badge, across a picture of
   him in a suit.) Able and intelligent, he struggles to connect with
   those less blessed. He has a tendency to spout too many numbers, and
   he slips too often into consultant-speak.

   Mr Huckabee stabs this weak spot with a smile. Americans would rather
   their president reminded them of someone they work with, he says, not
   the guy who laid them off. This is unfair. As a venture capitalist, Mr
   Romney created jobs as well as destroying them. Staples, one of
   several firms he helped set up, now employs 74,000 people. But he has
   already been amply rewarded for this success. Voters seem reluctant to
   reward him further.

   Mr Romney's fans are typically people who did not flunk algebra. Jean
   Esslinger, a financial adviser, says she thinks his résumé is "very,
   very impressive". As a divorced mother of three, she admires his
   devotion to his family. Andrew Fales, an accountant and campaign
   volunteer, was once a Mormon missionary in the Philippines. He says
   knocking on doors for Mr Romney is easier than winning converts for
   his church. But that is not saying much.

   Mr Giuliani has done woefully in the early states. In some precincts
   in Iowa, where voters heard short speeches in favour of each candidate
   before they voted, no one could be found to make the case for him.
   Though many Republicans admire him for curbing crime in New York and
   keeping cool on September 11th 2001, they are less impressed by his
   tolerance for legal abortion and dodgy henchmen.

   So what happens next? Mr Romney aims to win Michigan, where his father
   was governor, next week. But Mr McCain might frustrate him again. Mr
   Huckabee expects to win South Carolina, where there are a lot of
   evangelicals, on January 19th. Mr Giuliani hopes to capture Florida on
   January 29th, but his utter lack of momentum will make this tricky.
   Then, on February 5th, comes Super Tuesday. The way things are going,
   even that may not settle it.

