
   As voters weary of the front-runners, what a chance for Al Gore

   ENOUGH already. The primaries are 11 months away and the race is
   already growing stale. The citizens of Iowa and New Hampshire are
   longing for the day when they can visit Denny's without having to meet
   Hillary or Rudy. And the press is busy recycling the same old stories.
   Can Barack Obama run for president and give up smoking at the same
   time? Will Hillary hand her Senate seat to Bill if she wins? Is
   America ready for a Mormon president? Or a black? Or a woman? Or a man
   who once dressed as Marilyn Monroe?

   There is no shortage of money or ideas: the candidates' treasure
   chests are overflowing and the think-tanks churn out policy papers.
   But there is a severe shortage of attention. People will not be able
   to watch the same soap opera, endlessly repeated on 24-hour cable news
   and pored over in the blogosphere, for months on end without getting
   sick of the main characters.

   Which means that there is a huge opportunity for somebody to arrive
   late and steal the show. The late entrant will not only have the
   advantage of being a fresh face. He or she could also change the whole
   dynamic of the race, gaining enough momentum to storm through Iowa and
   New Hampshire.

   Step forward Al Gore. Mr Gore has enough of a national profile to
   command instant credibility. He has rich friends to finance him. He
   will also command plenty of attention in his own right over the next
   few months: his film "An Inconvenient Truth" could win an Oscar for
   best documentary on Sunday, and he may be up for the Nobel peace prize
   in the autumn.

   Mr Gore is the ideal candidate for the Democratic stalwarts who turn
   out to vote in the primaries. He came out strongly against invading
   Iraq. He has spent the past six years warning the world about global
   warming. And he was robbed of victory in 2000 by the man whom the
   Democrats loathe above all others. What better way of wiping out the
   Bush era than replacing him with the man who should have been
   president?

   Mr Gore is adamant that he does not want to run again. But will he be
   able to resist? It would be one of the great dramas of American
   political history. And James Carville, keen observer of politicians,
   says that, for them, running for president is rather like having sex
   for normal people: it is not something that you do just once if you
   have any say in the matter.

