
   Hillary Clinton no longer looks inevitable 




   ON December 8th Hillary Clinton received what should have been a boost
   from Andrew Young, one of the giants of the civil-rights movement. Mr
   Young pronounced that he wants her chief rival, Barack Obama, to be
   president--but in 2016, not 2008.

   The 46-year-old Mr Obama is just too green about the gills for the
   highest office in the land, Mr Young argued, and lacks a network of
   political allies that could sustain him in times of trouble. "To put a
   brother in there by himself is to set him up for crucifixion," he
   said. But he could not resist adding a kicker. "Bill [Clinton] is
   every bit as black as Barack--he's probably gone with more black women
   than Barack."

   Mr Young's faux pas is a small symptom of the Clinton campaign's
   troubles. Mrs Clinton's commanding leads in the make-or-break states
   of Iowa, New Hampshire and South Carolina have evaporated. And the
   much-vaunted Hillary machine is looking, for the moment at least, more
   Heath Robinson than Vorsprung durch Technik. The bad news keeps
   coming, and even the good news has a way of turning bad.

   Mr Obama is proving to be Mrs Clinton's perfect nightmare. He has not
   only neutralised her most compelling claim for attention--the first
   black president is a more momentous prospect than the first woman
   president. He has also shaped the race. His early entry into the
   contest forced Mrs Clinton to declare her candidacy sooner than she
   had planned. His fund-raising prowess forced her to make much more use
   of her husband than she had intended. Last weekend stadium-sized
   crowds turned up to watch Oprah Winfrey, the only woman in America who
   can turn "Anna Karenina" into a bestseller, stumping for Mr Obama. Mrs
   Clinton was reduced to touring Iowa with her daughter, Chelsea, and
   her mother, Dorothy.

   Mrs Clinton's problems have forced her to abandon the high horse of
   inevitability for the boxing ring. Yet so far she has proved to be no
   great shakes as a pugilist. She excused her poor performance in a
   debate in Philadelphia by accusing her fellow (male) candidates of
   "piling on". This feebly suggested that she wanted to be given special
   treatment because of her gender. Then she threw a succession of wild
   punches that made her look like an amateur. The Clinton campaign's
   decision to dredge up the fact that Mr Obama had written an essay in
   kindergarten on how he wanted to be president was particularly
   misguided. What sort of person quotes a kindergarten essay against a
   rival?

   Mrs Clinton's recent troubles have raised questions about what is
   arguably her most important selling-point, her competence. The
   Clintonistas have always presented her as a woman who is "tough
   enough" to deal with anything that is thrown at her--trained in the
   Clinton wars of the 1990s and always ready with a counter-punch. She
   is certainly one of America's most accomplished practitioners of the
   politics of personal destruction. But the skills that she perfected
   behind the scenes seem to be far less effective when they are
   practised in the limelight.

   Same old dirty politics

   Mrs Clinton's troubles have also reminded people of what they most
   disliked about the politics of the Clinton-Bush era. "She's run what
   Washington would call a textbook campaign," Mr Obama argues. "But the
   problem is the textbook itself." This is self-serving: all campaigns
   employ the dark arts of polls, story-planting and character
   assassination, and Mr Obama is no exception. But Mrs Clinton is
   vulnerable to the charge that she uses them more than most. She is
   surrounded by veteran pollsters and lobbyists from her husband's
   administration. She seems to delight in political warfare--"Now the
   fun part starts," she stupidly declared about her battle with Mr
   Obama. And her campaign seems addicted to spin. Mr Clinton did his
   wife no favours when he recently declared, despite evidence to the
   contrary, that he had opposed the Iraq war from the start.

   Mrs Clinton's style inevitably raises questions about her character.
   Discuss her with voters and the same words keep cropping
   up--"disciplined", "robotic", "cold", "scripted", "calculating" (if
   childhoods are to be invoked, even her mother once said that "she just
   does everything she has to do to get along and get ahead"). Large
   numbers of voters regard her as slippery and untrustworthy. This
   inevitably raises questions about her electability. Mrs Clinton
   sometimes manages to lose in head-to-head polls against leading
   Republicans, despite a tidal wave of anti-Republican sentiment. A
   recent Gallup poll showed that, with 47% of people favourably disposed
   to her and 50% unfavourably disposed, she had the highest "negatives"
   of any candidate in the race, Democratic or Republican. Those
   negatives are particularly high in swing states such as Colorado.

   None of this means that the former first lady's goose is cooked. Mrs
   Clinton is still well ahead in national polls and in the often
   overlooked early state of Nevada. Americans do not necessarily feel
   that they need to like their presidents. Richard Nixon won a
   resounding victory in 1972. Nearly as many Americans disliked Bill
   Clinton as liked him when he ran for the White House. And the (just
   about) Republican front-runner, Rudy Giuliani, is hardly a likeable
   chap. Ed Koch once wrote a book about his fellow mayor simply entitled
   "Giuliani: Nasty Man".

   But Mrs Clinton's problems are slowly shifting the calculus at the
   heart of the Democratic race. Hitherto most Democrats have calculated,
   or perhaps been resigned to thinking, that she is the safest bet. The
   young Mr Obama might deliver a spectacular victory, but he might
   equally well flame out spectacularly. Mrs Clinton may always have high
   negatives but, in an anti-Republican year, she would be wily and
   experienced enough to take on the Republican machine and eke out a
   victory in the electoral college. The past few weeks have made Mr
   Obama look a bit less risky--and Mrs Clinton a lot less safe.

