
   How much will the Bay State's plan for universal health coverage cost?

   WHEN Massachusetts forged ahead with a plan for universal health
   coverage for all its citizens, many were sceptical. It will soon be
   clear whether the doubters were right. The plan faces its first big
   test this month: uninsured residents must sign up for a health plan by
   the end of the year or be fined.

   Early signs suggest the plan is going well. Some critics had argued
   that it would not achieve universal coverage because the penalties for
   non-compliance (about $220, though this figure will rise sharply next
   year) were too small, but this week state officials announced that
   some 300,000 had already signed up. That is roughly half of the
   state's uninsured population, reckoned to be between 500,000 and
   700,000. However, many of those who have recently signed up are poorer
   people whose new insurance is being subsidised, so the real test is
   yet to come.

   Another worry has been that the scheme will "crowd out" the private
   sector by encouraging employers to drop coverage. Here too the
   evidence is positive, though tentative. Several surveys of employers
   suggest that very few so far (only 3% according to one poll) have
   stopped covering their workers.

   The news on cost is less encouraging. Over the long haul, universal
   coverage schemes are supposed to reduce costs (see [3]article).
   Another reason to think cost rises would slow down under the
   Massachusetts scheme is the "Connector", a government-created and
   partly-subsidised market-place for insurance products that aims to
   beg, bully and badger health-care providers and insurers into
   containing costs.

   That is a fine theory, but in practice, concedes Jonathan Gruber, a
   professor at MIT and an architect of the state's reform plan, "We're
   struggling with this." Next year's insurance premiums are likely to
   rise by 10-12%, confirms James Roosevelt, head of the organisation
   representing the state's health plans. Officials running the new
   health-reform effort this week declared grandly that costs must not
   increase by more than 5% next year--but, as Mr Roosevelt observes,
   that seems "more hopeful than likely". Mr Gruber explains that the
   state can influence rates for those who get subsidies, but says that
   commercial insurers can do pretty much what they like about rates for
   the rest of the population.

   If costs continue to soar, the state will not be able to afford this
   scheme for long, and it will become unpopular. Mindful of the brewing
   storm, the state's insurers are launching a charm offensive. Mr
   Roosevelt's group promises much greater transparency in insurance
   pricing and wants hospitals to do the same. Will that be enough?
   Sunlight is a powerful disinfectant--but it may meet its match in
   health-care inflation.

