
                                                                       AP

                                     AP

                             Room for only one

   Far from Iowa, two would-be presidents are biding their time 


   AS THE other candidates battled frostbite and each other in Iowa, two
   men were conspicuously absent. Rudy Giuliani was planning to be in
   Florida on January 3rd, the day of Iowa's first-in-the-nation
   caucuses. Michael Bloomberg, having popped over to Bali before
   Christmas to address the UN conference on climate change, is about to
   give another big speech on January 7th in Oklahoma, this time about
   non-partisan politics.

   Neither man had any chance of winning Iowa. Mr Giuliani is too
   metropolitan for Iowa Republicans, with his divorces, his tolerance of
   abortion and his easy friendship with gays. Mr Bloomberg is not even
   on the ballot. Yet both men could shape the presidential race.

   Mr Giuliani may be weak in the early-voting states, but he leads
   national polls of Republican voters, albeit increasingly narrowly. His
   lead may disappear entirely if early victories lend momentum to a
   rival. But, for now, he is still the man to beat.

   His strategy is a risky one. He is not quite sitting out the first six
   races, but he hints that they hardly matter. If he does well in Iowa,
   Wyoming, New Hampshire, Michigan, Nevada or South Carolina, fine. But
   the first race that counts, his people suggest, will be on January
   29th in Florida, where he leads. Brent Seaborn, a strategist for Mr
   Giuliani, predicts that his boss will win the Sunshine State and come
   to "Super-Duper Tuesday" (February 5th, when more than 20 states will
   vote), with more delegates lined up behind him than any other
   candidate. Mr Giuliani would then rely on his popularity in big
   coastal states such as New York and California, where voters are less
   easily shocked by his private life, to propel him to the nomination.

   This is optimistic, but not absurd. The Republican field is
   splintered. If the early primaries produce no clear front-runner, Mr
   Giuliani's national celebrity could see him through. He is a deft
   campaigner, admitting to flaws, while sparing audiences details
   (adultery, dodgy friends, apparent conflicts of interest) that they
   can look up on the web. He trumpets his two strengths: crime fell
   sharply while he was mayor of New York, and he kept cool when the city
   was attacked by terrorists. Often, he conflates these into a single
   unified theory of toughness in the face of bad guys. The world is
   dangerous, as Benazir Bhutto's assassination has reminded voters.

   But his steel is starting to look tarnished. To compensate for his
   social liberalism, which repels many Republican primary voters, he has
   hammed up his tough-guy act to such an extreme that it could harm him
   in a general election. Swing voters mostly feel that eight years of
   bellicosity is plenty. And although his mix of fiscal conservatism and
   social liberalism appeals to many, even social liberals gag at reports
   that he billed taxpayers for security expenses incurred during
   adulterous trysts. The recent indictment on corruption charges of
   Bernard Kerik, whom he appointed as New York's police chief, is not
   helping either.

   If Mr Giuliani fizzles, Mr Bloomberg is a likely beneficiary. He is a
   less colourful figure. Whereas Mr Giuliani rescued New York from
   dysfunction, his successor as mayor has merely continued to run it
   well. Like Mr Giuliani, Mr Bloomberg is fiscally conservative and
   socially liberal. But unlike Mr Giuliani, he is a billionaire, so he
   can fund his own (undeclared and semi-denied) presidential campaign.

   Rather than stretching uncomfortably to woo primary-voting activists,
   Mr Bloomberg can be himself. If he runs, it will be as a moderate
   third-party candidate. Unlike many Republicans, he favours swift
   action to curb climate change. Unlike the main Democrats, he admits
   that a carbon tax, though unpopular, would be the best way to do it.
   As a third-party candidate, he could offer sensible policies on
   immigration, gun control, poverty and more.

   If Hillary Clinton and Mr Giuliani are the Democratic and Republican
   nominees, there will scarcely be room for another New Yorker in the
   race. But if one party picks a base-pleasing populist (say, Mike
   Huckabee or John Edwards), Mr Bloomberg may see open ground for a
   pragmatic centrist. Even as he touts the virtues of non-partisanship
   in Oklahoma, he will be keeping a close eye on Iowa.

