
   An annoying self-publicist may enliven a debate about America's health
   system

   WILL America solve its health-care problems by moving to a
   government-run health system like the one in Britain? The notion seems
   absurd given the spectacular failure of efforts by Bill and Hillary
   Clinton to promote the idea over a decade ago. Even Mrs Clinton
   herself no longer advocates Hillarycare.

   Yet the issue will not go away: politicians as different as Arnold
   Schwarzenegger, Mitt Romney and John Edwards keep plugging away at it.
   And now there is "Sicko", the latest documentary by Michael Moore, a
   filmmaker known for tackling thorny political issues with leftist
   vigour. The film, which featured at the Cannes Film Festival last
   weekend, goes on general release in June--and its subject is the
   inequities of America's health system.

   Mr Moore, true to form, has orchestrated publicity stunts that would
   make the circus promoter P.T. Barnum proud. In making his film, he
   took a group of people who had volunteered to help after the attacks
   of September 11th, 2001, but who could not get proper health care
   afterward, to Cuba. He first tried getting them help at the American
   military base at Guantánamo Bay, where officials claim accused
   al-Qaeda detainees are getting outstanding free health care, but was
   rebuffed; he then took the Americans to Havana, where Cuban
   authorities were only too happy to provide treatment for a pittance.

   Fred Thompson, a former senator and a Republican presidential
   aspirant, has publicly denounced this as pandering to the thuggish
   regime of Fidel Castro. When Mr Moore responded that the senator was a
   hypocrite because he is a fan of Cuban cigars, Mr Thompson released a
   video of himself chomping a stogie and telling the filmmaker to
   consider a mental asylum. Mr Moore claims he is now the target of a
   federal investigation because his trip violated the trade embargo of
   Cuba. The film's producers declare breathlessly that they have whisked
   a copy of the film's master negative overseas to avoid confiscation by
   the evil authorities.

   Ghastly though he may be, Mr Moore has had uncommon success with his
   previous films ("Fahrenheit 9/11" earned over $200m), and "Sicko"
   looks to be another conversation starter. At least some of the antics
   will have been worth enduring if they lead to a proper debate on
   health reform, including the merits and failings of single-payer
   systems.

