
   A good cause, but a bad policy

   THERE is a new price to be paid for looking at naked women in Texas.
   On January 1st the state's strip clubs began imposing a $5 surcharge
   for each visitor. The "pole tax," as it is commonly called, is
   expected to bring the state an additional $40m in revenue each year.
   Most of the proceeds will go to programmes that support victims of
   sexual assault.

   Helping rape victims is obviously an excellent idea, and the measure
   was passed by the Texas legislature easily last year. But it is
   controversial in some quarters. Club owners, in particular, think they
   are being shaken down and vilified despite providing a perfectly legal
   service, and are already sounding a little defensive. Commercials for
   The Lodge, in Dallas, boast that its customers enjoy "women, manly
   steaks, cigars, and women." In light of the new tax a co-owner has
   noted, rather less laddishly, that the club also raises money for
   charity via car washes. Smaller clubs are worried that their patrons
   cannot or will not pony up five measly dollars, a prediction that may
   prove true but is certainly rather depressing.

   Another gripe is that the tax implies an unfair link between club
   patronage and sexual violence, though no evidence to support this has
   been presented. State representative Ellen Cohen, who sponsored the
   legislation, argued that connecting the two is fair because both strip
   clubs and sex crimes objectify women. And apparently a majority of
   Texas legislators were comfortable with that explanation. In 2004, in
   contrast, Governor Rick Perry proposed taxing strip clubs to pay for
   public schools. The idea was considered inappropriate and it went
   nowhere.

   Such targeted taxes seem to be in vogue at the moment. Gavin Newsom,
   the mayor of San Francisco, recently proposed that retailers pay a fee
   for selling sugar-laden fizzy drinks. The revenue would fund a city
   initiative to encourage healthy eating and exercise. Last year's
   proposed expansion of the State Children's Health Insurance Programme
   would have been funded by increased tobacco taxes (though the
   connection here also seems rather a stretch, since not that many
   children smoke; George Bush vetoed it anyway). In Wisconsin, a state
   legislator wants to raise more money for the juvenile criminal justice
   system via a tax on video games.

   Critics say that all of these measures are punitive. Louche behaviour,
   after all, is not a crime. But its practitioners have had a hard time
   making their case. Last month opponents of the pole tax filed for a
   temporary injunction against it. They argued that nude dancing is a
   type of expression and that its free exercise should therefore not be
   inhibited. The judge was unimpressed.

