
   California enters the fight for universal health care

   AFTER almost a year of difficult surgery, during which it occasionally
   seemed dead, California's health-care reform plan abruptly leapt out
   of bed on December 17th. Arnold Schwarzenegger, the state's Republican
   governor, agreed a bill with the Democratic majority in the
   legislature that would dramatically widen health coverage. There were
   smiles of relief all round; but the bill's prognosis is bleak.

   Like a similar but more modest measure that came into effect in
   Massachusetts this year, the bill requires almost all Californians to
   have health insurance, beginning in 2010. It also extends health
   coverage to the children of illegal immigrants. There will be
   subsidies for those who earn less than two-and-a-half times the
   federal poverty level, or $42,925 for a family of three, and tax
   credits for the more affluent. This will be paid for by a tax on
   businesses that fail to provide health insurance, a levy on hospitals
   and yet more taxes for that much put-upon group, smokers.

   These levies are not, however, spelled out in the measure that passed
   this week. Since any bill that included a tax hike would have been
   blocked by California's ornery Republicans, that part must be approved
   directly by the voters next November--assuming the bill first clears
   the state Senate. Opposition, from insurance companies, small
   businesses and tobacco firms, will be fierce and well-funded.

   California's move will affect the presidential campaign. The
   Democratic candidates Hillary Clinton and John Edwards have proposed
   similar reforms, which now have a bipartisan stamp (Barack Obama is
   against forcing people to take out health insurance). Mrs Clinton has
   already borrowed Mr Schwarzenegger's line that the current system, in
   which many of the uninsured receive free health care in emergency
   rooms, is a "hidden tax".

   One problem with the bill is that it assumes health-care costs can be
   kept in check. That has not been the case so far: between 1960 and
   2005 the share of national income gobbled up by health more than
   tripled. This week the Congressional Budget Office pleaded for a more
   hard-headed approach to assessing the costs and benefits of new drugs
   and medical procedures. Britain does that rather well. But Catherine
   DeAngelis, a physician who edits the Journal of the American Medical
   Association, bristles that this risks turning her profession into a
   "business".

