
   The Manchurian candidate
   "The Muslims have said they plan on destroying the US from the inside
   out, what better way to start than at the highest level--through the
   president of the United States, one of their own!!!!"

   Two volunteers for the Clinton campaign have resigned over forwarding
   e-mails saying that Barack Obama is a Muslim sleeper-agent.
   [3]Politico.com. December 5th 

   School days
   "I know that folks were rifling through my kindergarten papers. I'm
   going to be disclosing them tomorrow. It will show that I experimented
   with colouring outside the lines. I was pulling on pigtails."

   Mr Obama continues to make hay with the Clinton campaign's excesses.
   [4]ABCNews.com, December 12th

   Free will
   "I'm not here to tell you what to think. I got some sense. I know the
   difference between a book club and this seminal moment in our
   history."

   Oprah Winfrey campaigning last weekend for Mr Obama. 

   Job seeker
   "Since I'm from Georgia, I'll say the opposite of Sherman...If
   drafted, I would run, and if nominated, I would serve."

   Newt Gingrich wants to be vice-president. "This Week", ABC, December
   9th 

   Food pyramid
   "Carrots. I just don't like carrots. I banned them from the governor's
   mansion when I was governor of Arkansas because I could."

   Mike Huckabee discusses his most disliked food. Other candidates are
   equally opposed to vegetables; mushrooms are particularly unpopular.
   Associated Press, December 6th 

   Life's disappointments
   "Voters are going to say, `I want to get my Christmas shopping done.'
   They're going to go to their mailboxes hoping for an invitation to a
   cocktail party, and instead get a campaign mailing."

   Donna Brazile, a Democratic strategist, on why most campaigns will
   take a break over Christmas. Des Moines Register, December 10th 

   Southern hospitality
   "He's masquerading as a good ole boy."

   Jim Hanks, chairman of the South Carolina League of the South, objects
   to Tennessean Fred Thompson's lack of support for reintroducing the
   Confederate flag. [5]CNN.com, December 5th

   Insane clown posse
   "These people are crazy--crazy in a good way."

   Ron Paul's son on his father's supporters. [6]Washingtonpost.com,
   December 10th 

