
   For presidential candidates, the holiday season will not be restful 




   EVEN those who dislike Hillary Clinton want to hitch a ride in her
   helicopter, inevitably dubbed "the Hillacopter". With a dozen
   presidential candidates criss-crossing Iowa to scramble for support
   before the caucuses on January 3rd, everyone following them wants to
   be in several places at once. And the roads are icy.

   Parking is like curling. The main roads have been salted well, but not
   perfectly. Your correspondent spun once on black ice and saw three
   accidents. After dark, the oncoming traffic includes farm trucks with
   only one headlight. Mrs Clinton only has to dodge heckles.

   The locals grumble more about the weather than politics. In a coffee
   shop in Creston, a small town south-west of Des Moines, the customers
   form two groups: those whose electricity has been restored since a
   recent storm, and those who are still waiting. "We're living like
   cavemen," chuckles one of the staff.

   When talk does turn to politics, the mood is disgruntled. Between
   mouthfuls of syrup-soaked pancake, Dalyne Gaede laments that he can no
   longer find work. He used to help make sophisticated machinery:
   self-service cash registers for Wal-Mart and trash cans that say
   "thank you". But then he needed back surgery, and suddenly no one will
   hire him because his health insurance is too expensive.

   A triumph in Iowa can kick-start a candidate towards his party's
   nomination. Yet turnout is usually low. Out of a voting-age population
   of 2m, only 130,000 caucused in 2004. More will probably show up this
   time because both parties are competing and the races are close. On
   the Democratic side, Mrs Clinton, John Edwards and Barack Obama all
   have a shot. Mr Obama is slightly ahead, but Iowa polls are habitually
   unreliable. Among the Republicans, Mike Huckabee has opened a sizeable
   lead over Mitt Romney, but with his new prominence has come
   unaccustomed scrutiny.

   Every candidate faces a holiday season without rest. Most will
   campaign until as close to Christmas Day as they can without
   interrupting the festivities. The Democrats especially are working
   harder than ever, inflicting their friends, families and celebrity
   endorsers on hapless Iowans.

   Besides firing up their existing supporters and courting undecided
   voters, they are also trying to persuade their rivals' supporters to
   make them their second choice. Under Iowa's caucus system, voters will
   gather in some 2,000 small precincts and discuss the candidates before
   selecting their first choice. Under the Democrats' version (though not
   the Republicans') those whose candidates fail to win more than 15% or
   so of the votes in a precinct are then invited to transfer their vote
   to another, "viable", candidate. This takes time, so only the most
   motivated take part.

   Each candidate has a different style. Mrs Clinton leads her troops
   through the snow with such discipline that, had Napoleon copied it, he
   might have conquered Russia. Other Democrats' campaign staff are happy
   to answer questions. In Des Moines, Jim Mowrer, an Iraq veteran, says
   he supports Joe Biden because he is the only Democrat with a plan to
   quit Iraq without leaving chaos behind. The Clintonistas beside him
   say they are not authorised to talk to the press.

   At Mrs Clinton's campaign office in Creston, the lone staffer consults
   his boss by telephone. His boss tells him not to reveal anything. Not
   even his personal reasons for liking Mrs Clinton? No. Not even where a
   guy can get a cup of coffee in Creston? The staffer hesitates before
   divulging this potentially sensitive information.

   At Mr Obama's campaign office in the same town, the welcome is warmer:
   a seat, a cup of coffee and a list of local Obama-ites to call. Karl
   Knock, the chairman of a local bank, says he likes the openness of Mr
   Obama's campaign. The candidate does not simply issue orders; he asks
   questions. America needs a new leader who is not entrenched in old
   battles, he says.

   Mr Edwards, a former trial lawyer and vice-presidential nominee, is
   running the angriest Democratic campaign. Though his manner is smooth
   and smiley, he rails without cease against the greedy corporations
   that supposedly make ordinary Americans' lives miserable. He lies
   third in the polls in Iowa, but his tireless stumping in remote
   hamlets might conceivably allow him to snatch a victory.

   Mrs Clinton is still the woman to beat, however. Other candidates
   pander. She does her homework and then micropanders. For voters who
   fret about the environment and globalisation, she praises solar power.
   Someone has to screw those solar panels on the roof, and that's a job
   that can't be outsourced, she tells a crowd in a fire station in
   Shenandoah, near the Nebraska border.

   Are you worried about violent video games? So is Mrs Clinton. They can
   lead, she says, to horrors such as the recent massacre in a mall in
   Omaha. Mrs Clinton knows the name of the local man who was injured
   there, of course. She's really intelligent, agree several members of
   the audience. But one couple say Bill Richardson, the governor of New
   Mexico, is more qualified. A paranoid local lawyer mutters about Vince
   Foster, a friend of Mrs Clinton's who killed himself in 1993 but whom
   conspiracy theorists say was murdered.

   The Republicans' Mrs Clinton is Mitt Romney, an ex-governor of
   Massachusetts. He, too, faces a younger, more charismatic threat. Mr
   Romney gives PowerPoint presentations; Mr Huckabee airs an ad wishing
   Iowans a merry Christmas.

   Mr Huckabee has ethical problems (he accepted a ton of gifts when he
   was governor of Arkansas), eccentric policies (scrap income taxes,
   make America self-sufficient in food) and a feeble grasp of world
   affairs. But his verbal dexterity and years as a Baptist preacher
   allow him to dodge almost any awkward question with a Biblical
   allusion. He is joyfully backed by evangelicals and home-schoolers.
   Eric Woolson, his campaign manager in Iowa, cannot understand why the
   media harp on about his strong support among those who go to church
   every week. "Everyone I know goes to church every week," he says.

   A loss in Iowa could cripple Mr Romney, so he is fighting back hard.
   His television spots accuse Mr Huckabee of being soft on crime (his
   faith led him to pardon many criminals when he was governor) and
   illegal immigration. This is risky. Iowans don't like negative
   campaigning, says Cary Covington, a politics professor at the
   University of Iowa. Meanwhile, Rudy Giuliani and John McCain, two
   Republicans with no hope in Iowa but national reputations, are biding
   their time.

   For both parties, a bitter struggle looms. But actual violence has so
   far been mild. Dan Holman, who follows Mrs Clinton around waving a
   gruesome anti-abortion banner, was allegedly poked in the ribs with a
   broom handle by an elderly householder who accused him of standing on
   his property. But Mr Holman recovered and is still haranguing his
   nemesis.

