
   The risky business of defying the Democratic National Committee

   FOR years Michigan's Democrats have said that the primary system gives
   Iowa and New Hampshire unfair attention. So last autumn the state's
   Democrats and equally miffed Republicans moved their contests right up
   into January. Michigan became a political hot spot, with candidates
   swooning at Detroit's latest cars and promising to revive the state's
   economy. At least, that's what the Republicans did. No Democrat turned
   up, except for Dennis Kucinich.

   The Democratic National Committee (DNC) angrily stripped Michigan and
   Florida, the other big state to defy the party and move its contest
   forward, of their delegates to the party convention in August, when
   the candidate will be nominated. (The Republican Party's gentler
   punishment was to cut the number of delegates in half.) Mark Brewer,
   Michigan's Democratic chairman, says the DNC will let his delegates
   attend the convention, but that remains to be seen.

   The result of all this, complained a writer for the Detroit Free
   Press, was a primary comparable to "NASCAR on bicycles, Halloween with
   no costumes and Miss America without swimsuits" (the last event might
   not be as dull as he meant). Hillary Clinton won 55% of the vote;
   hardly a victory, since her only rivals on the ballot were Chris Dodd
   (who withdrew from the race weeks ago), Mike Gravel (who?) and Mr
   Kucinich (the candidate who just won't go away).

   A remarkable 40% voted "uncommitted" in support of Barack Obama and
   John Edwards, who took their names off Michigan's ballot in deference
   to the official schedule. Their supporters hope the "uncommitted" vote
   will earn them delegates who could support their candidate at the
   convention--assuming any delegates from Michigan are allowed.

   Many local Democrats are angry with both the state and the national
   party. "People are so disappointed and discouraged," explained
   Christina Montague, leader of Michiganders for Obama. One of Mr
   Edwards's supporters has sued the state party, unsuccessfully, for
   disenfranchisement.

   Michigan's Democratic leaders are supporting their decision to go
   early. Carl Levin, Michigan's senior senator, hopes to inspire other
   states to demand that the DNC change its "cockamamie" system. (He has
   a bill that would do just that.) Mr Brewer insists that the early
   primary is "short-term pain for long-term reform". Pain, yes. The
   reform is less certain.

   Still, the DNC has not yet won this skirmish. If the attempt to
   strong-arm the states alienates the Democratic base in Michigan or
   Florida, the party may be the real loser in November.

