
                                                                       AP

                                     AP

                            Fraternal greetings

   The Democrats are convulsed by emotive arguments 

   IN A high-minded moment in the Democratic debate in Las Vegas on
   January 15th Hillary Clinton declared that "what's most important is
   that Senator Obama and I agree completely that, you know, neither race
   nor gender should be a part of this campaign." Meanwhile, back in the
   real world, their respective camps were arguing about nothing else.

   Many blacks have taken objection to a couple of remarks that the
   Clintons made during the New Hampshire primary. Mrs Clinton averred
   that "Dr King's dream began to be realised when President Lyndon
   Johnson passed the Civil Rights Act of 1964". Bill Clinton--the two
   are joined hip and thigh during this campaign--accused Mr Obama of
   purveying a "fairy tale".

   The Clintons have reacted furiously to the charge of racial
   insensitivity--and their team has busily accused the Obama camp of
   twisting their words for partisan advantage. They have a point. Mr
   Clinton was referring to Mr Obama's opposition to the Iraq war. Mrs
   Clinton was emphasising the importance of experience in bringing about
   solid legislative change (though one wonders what sort of experienced
   Democratic politician speaks anything but reverently of Dr King). The
   Obama camp's hypersensitivity to presumed racial slights undercuts
   their champion's claim to be running as a post-racial politician.

   Still, Mr Obama's lieutenants were not the only people to take
   offence. Donna Brazile, Al Gore's former campaign manager and a
   neutral in this race, thought that they crossed the line, as did James
   Clyburn, an extremely influential South Carolina congressman. And
   black radio stations have been talking about nothing else.

   Mr Clinton's excuses were drowned in the noise created by Robert
   Johnson, a black mogul who founded Black Entertainment Television.
   Introducing Mrs Clinton in South Carolina, Mr Johnson claimed that the
   Clintons "have been deeply and emotionally involved with black issues
   since Barack Obama was doing something in the neighbourhood--and I
   won't say what he was doing but he said it in his book." Mr Johnson's
   preposterous claim that he was talking about Mr Obama's community
   activism rather than his cocaine use has persuaded nobody.

   The debate is not likely to die down--despite the candidates'
   protestations about taking gender and race off the table. The South
   Carolina primary looms on January 26th--the first primary in the South
   and the first that has not been played out before an overwhelmingly
   white electorate. Blacks make up half of the Democratic electorate in
   the state, and are leaning heavily towards Mr Obama. A Rasmussen poll
   found the two candidates neck and neck a month ago. This week
   Rasmussen found Mr Obama leading by 38 points to 33. Mr Obama leads by
   53 to 30 among blacks but loses by 21 to 40 among whites.

   The row also reflects deep cleavages along race and gender lines among
   Democratic voters nationally. Rasmussen shows Mr Obama beating Mrs
   Clinton by 66% to 16% among blacks but trailing her 27% to 41% among
   whites. Gallup shows Mrs Clinton leading Mr Obama by 49 points to 19
   points among females who are older than 50 and by 42 points to 28
   points among women aged 18 to 49.

   Mrs Clinton is banking on her edge among women. Her tearful moment in
   a New Hampshire diner, which is widely credited with reviving her
   floundering campaign, went down particularly well with older women.
   She repeatedly emphasises her hard work on behalf of her gender. In a
   remarkable exercise in doublethink she claimed on one of the Sunday
   talk shows that "you have a woman running to break the highest and
   hardest glass ceiling. I don't think either of us wants to inject race
   or gender in this campaign. We're running as individuals".

   The other reason why the debate will continue is that the Clintons'
   main aim at the moment is to drive up Mr Obama's "negatives". They
   desperately need to reverse polls that show that, despite his failure
   in New Hampshire, Mr Obama is picking up support in a large swathe of
   demographic groups.

   This will involve attacking his political record and picking apart his
   personal biography (it is striking that two Clinton supporters have
   already brought up Mr Obama's admitted cocaine use). None of this is
   likely to go down well with Americans who regard Mr Obama as one of
   the most talented politicians of his generation, and who hope that he
   will become America's first black president.

