
   Americans have always been conflicted about black gold 



   FLAGELLATING the oil business is one of America's proudest traditions.
   Ida Tarbell, the greatest of the muckraking journalists, accused
   Standard Oil of building its empire on "fraud, deceit, special
   privilege, gross illegality, bribery, coercion, corruption,
   intimidation, espionage or outright terror". Upton Sinclair demonised
   the oil barons in his 1927 novel "Oil!". Today bookshop shelves are
   crammed with tomes denouncing the Bush oil dynasty, or predicting that
   America's dependence on oil will bring environmental Armageddon.

   Paul Thomas Anderson's "There Will Be Blood" is a striking
   contribution to this tradition. The film, which is loosely based on
   Sinclair's book, is a study of frontier capitalism at its rawest. It
   is set in the badlands of the West--all scrub and rocks--where the
   people are too poor to buy bread and the only solace lies in the
   wonder-working power of Pentecostalism. The discovery of oil suddenly
   pours wealth into the community, but also brings all the usual sins of
   greed and envy. The local preacher is consumed by the dream of
   building a huge church.

   The film is also a study of obsession. Daniel Day-Lewis's performance
   as Daniel Plainview, a wildcatter-turned-tycoon, is not only
   mesmerising (Slate's Dana Stevens describes it as "beyond praise"). It
   is also utterly merciless. Most of Hollywood's business anti-heroes
   are redeemed by their attachment to their families: the heroin baron
   at the heart of "American Gangster" at least buys a mansion for his
   mother. But the only two relationships Plainview manages--with his
   adopted son and a man who claims to be his half-brother--both
   collapse. Plainview is eventually left with nothing but his oil
   fortune and the resentments he has accumulated while making it.

   Why have some Americans always harboured such hostility to the oil
   industry? Their loathing long predates worries about man's carbon
   footprint. It flies in the face of America's love affair with cars and
   the extravagant use of fuel. Many oilmen, too, have been
   quintessential entrepreneurs, self-reliant types who have wrestled
   wealth out of an unforgiving frontier. The great oil tycoons have
   recycled their wealth through philanthropy on a huge scale. Yet they
   are often hated.

   One reason is the sheer wealth and power of the oil families. America
   is one of the few rich countries with a large oil industry (the other
   two--Canada and Norway--are not given to America's ostentatious
   displays of wealth and power). The first oil boom after 1870 produced
   such titans as John D. Rockefeller (America's first billionaire) and
   Stephen Harkness. A second oil boom after the second world war
   produced a new generation of Texan tycoons such as the Hunts and the
   Basses.

   Kevin Phillips has compiled fascinating lists of America's 30 richest
   families throughout the 20th century. The list for 1901-14 contains
   six families who made their money wholly or partly out of oil. The
   lists for 1968 and 1982 contain eight and 11 families respectively.
   These oilmen have repeatedly redefined American power. Rockefeller's
   Standard Oil had the legislatures eating out of its hand. The sunbelt
   oilmen helped to promote the careers of Ronald Reagan and the Bushes.

   Another reason for hating the oil industry is that it has offered
   "progressives" not one convenient target but two. The first is
   "monopoly". In 1900 Standard Oil controlled more than 90% of the
   country's oil supply. Though that monopoly was eventually broken, a
   wave of mega-mergers in the 1990s has turned the remaining oil
   companies into some of the biggest businesses in the world. Two years
   ago Congress held a series of feisty hearings on the industry's
   alleged price-gouging, hearings that were hardly made more civil by
   the news that Lee Raymond, the head of Exxon Mobil, had been given a
   retirement package of $400m.

   The second target is frontier capitalism. The very thing that excites
   conservatives about the frontier--the fact that it allows spirited
   entrepreneurs to test themselves against nature in the pursuit of huge
   fortunes--disturbs liberals. Mr Anderson echoes long-standing liberal
   complaints. Primitive oil wells burst into flames all over his film.
   Men fall into tarry pits. The obsessed and misanthropic Plainview
   makes more money than he can spend while others are ruined.

   A growing slick of worries

   These days the oil critics have an embarrassment of riches to work
   with. Environmentalism is a perfect vehicle. The lust for oil is doing
   something more dangerous than creating the makeshift towns of
   Plainview's day: it is threatening to turn the world into an
   overheated mausoleum. And the Bush dynasty is the perfect foil. Dick
   Cheney subcontracted America's energy policy to his pals in the energy
   business and then fought like a demon to keep the proceedings secret.
   Two Bush presidents in a row have gone to war with the same oil-rich
   Arab country. George Bush junior has smirked at the problem of global
   warming--and the man he duelled with in 2000 has turned himself into
   the world's leading champion of environmentalism.

   Worries about oil are also spreading from its molten liberal core
   across the rest of the political spectrum. For many conservatives,
   "oil" now sums up images of sinister Arabs rather than rugged Texans
   (the United States now imports more than half its oil compared with
   less than a third in 1970). They fret that America's appetite for oil
   is enriching potentially hostile regimes in the Middle East. Most of
   the Republican candidates talk about energy independence.

   None of these problems is going to go away. Since oil is a global
   product, the notion of energy independence will remain a chimera.
   Americans, too, will remain reluctant to pay more for petrol or alter
   their energy-dependent way of life. Plenty more books and films
   excoriating oil can be expected in the years to come. Few, though,
   will be as good as "There Will Be Blood".

