
   The spooks change their tune, and the politicians recalibrate


   TWO years ago, America's spies assessed with "high confidence" that
   Iran was hell-bent on developing nuclear weapons. This week they did a
   U-turn. With equally high confidence, a new National Intelligence
   Estimate (NIE) concludes that the Iranians halted their covert
   nuclear-weapons programme in 2003, the year America invaded Iraq. The
   good news sparked mayhem in Washington, DC.

   The most hawkish Iran-watchers dismissed it. Given the Islamic
   Republic's history of nuclear cheating, its truckloads of petrodollars
   and the possibility of buying nuclear technology on the black market,
   how can the spooks possibly know that it has stopped trying to make a
   bomb? Norman Podhoretz, an arch-hawk who advises Rudy Giuliani, a
   Republican presidential candidate, speculated that the intelligence
   services were deliberately undermining George Bush to prevent him from
   bombing Iranian nuclear sites.

   Mr Bush, however, welcomed the report as evidence that his spies are
   getting better at figuring out what is going on in one of the world's
   most opaque states. He noted the judgment that Iran stopped its
   weapons programme because of outside pressure, which he considers a
   vindication of his tough approach. And he gave warning that Iran,
   which is still enriching uranium, could restart its bomb-building.

   Many Democrats seized on the report as further evidence that Mr Bush
   is an untrustworthy warmonger. Only weeks ago, noted John Edwards, a
   presidential candidate, Mr Bush was noisily rattling sabres at Iran,
   warning that "If you're interested in avoiding World War Three, it
   seems like you ought to be interested in preventing [Iran] from having
   the knowledge necessary to make a nuclear weapon." Mr Edwards accused
   Mr Bush and his neocon chums of having been "on a march to possible
   war with Iran for a long time". Senator Joe Biden, another would-be
   president, said that Iran "is not a nuclear threat to the United
   States" and vowed that if Mr Bush went to war with Iran without
   congressional approval, he would be impeached.

   Other Democrats were more circumspect. Barack Obama stressed that Iran
   is still a threat to its neighbours. Both he and Hillary Clinton urged
   more direct and energetic diplomacy to make sure that Iran never
   acquires nuclear weapons, and to persuade it to stop destabilising its
   neighbours, such as Iraq.

   It is not obvious whom the report will help at the 2008 election.
   Democrats will benefit from the revelation of another big intelligence
   snafu under Mr Bush. But Republicans may gain if voters feel relieved
   that it has been corrected. Democrats could do well if voters decide
   the world is a safer place than they thought. But Republicans could
   gain if Democrats begin to sound complacent. The NIE report is good
   news, says Al From of the Democratic Leadership Council, a centrist
   group, "but we Democrats have to be careful not to make it better news
   than it is. Iran will still be a threat for the next president."

   Although Mr Bush says the report does not require a change in American
   policy towards Iran, the situation has clearly altered. Hawks in the
   White House, such as the vice-president, are weaker. More cautious
   types, like Condoleezza Rice, the secretary of state, are stronger. It
   is inconceivable that Mr Bush could attack Iran's nuclear facilities
   after his own spies have said it is not making nuclear weapons, says
   Ray Takeyh of the Council on Foreign Relations, a think-tank. Then
   again, if Iran's leaders calculate that they will not be attacked,
   they may be emboldened to make more mischief. And so the arguments
   rage on.

