
   What ruins reveal about America 

   LINDSAY BAKER walks through the streets of Thurber carrying a hoe. It
   is handy for killing rattlesnakes, which lurk in the long grass that
   has all but swallowed the town. He also uses it to scrape in the dirt
   for what the people who once lived there left behind. He finds some
   shards of an old medicine bottle, the cap of a salt-shaker and a
   half-brick with markings that date it sometime between 1904 and 1936.
   If a brush fire clears the grass, you'll see artefacts like this
   everywhere, explains Mr Baker, a historian whose boyish enthusiasm for
   ghost towns belies his years.

   America has a lot of ghost towns. There are 1,000 in Texas alone.
   Thurber was once home to 10,000 people. Now there are only five. In
   its busy days, Thurber was a coal town. Immigrants flocked there from
   Italy, Poland and Mexico to dig up fuel for steam trains. The coal was
   also used to fire bricks made from local clay. The town boasted
   churches, baseball teams and even an opera house.

   But then someone found oil in Texas. Before long, the trains started
   burning oil instead of coal. Thurber's mine closed in 1926. And since
   cheap oil prompted Texans to start using asphalt instead of bricks to
   pave their roads, Thurber's brick kiln closed, too.

   The workers left. Their homes were sold for $50 to anyone who could
   carry them off. You can still see them in the surrounding countryside,
   serving as barns or storehouses. Little is left in Thurber itself but
   a smokestack, the graveyard (divided into Catholic, Protestant and
   black areas) and a few company buildings.

   The story is not all wretched, however. Many workers found jobs in the
   oil business. The company that built Thurber struck oil and prospered.
   The old boss's daughter-in-law donated money for a museum to preserve
   Thurber's memory, which Mr Baker runs. His qualifications are ideal:
   besides teaching industrial history at nearby Tarleton State
   University, he is the author of "Ghost Towns of Texas" and "More Ghost
   Towns of Texas".

   Something about ghost towns grips the American imagination. They
   provide an eerie backdrop for movies, children's books and theme-park
   rides. Ghost-town enthusiasts devote countless weekends to searching
   out remote examples, photographing them and posting their findings on
   websites such as [3]www.ghosttowns.com. Typically, they give imprecise
   directions so that only the most committed ghost-towners can follow
   their footsteps.

   Ghost towns are sad places, but also monuments to American dynamism.
   When work moves, so do Americans. With so much space, especially in
   the West, it can make sense to let a town die. But its memory may live
   on. Ghost towns give people a tangible connection to a mysterious
   past, says Mr Baker. Others treat history more playfully. On a hill
   near Thurber, someone has built a hunting lodge in the shape of a
   Scottish castle.

