


   Reforming America's health-care system is a thorny election issue

   IT IS obvious to anyone that the patient is ill. But the physicians
   agree on little else: not the underlying cause, certainly not the
   appropriate course of treatment and least of all which among them is
   best qualified to administer it. As they argue, the patient just gets
   sicker.

   Health care, along with the economy in general, immigration and the
   whole alarming nexus of war, terror and security is, according to
   pretty much every poll, one of the issues that American voters
   consider most important. And next year, in both the primaries and the
   general election, it will have particular resonance. Iraq may even
   fade as an election subject, if the number of Americans killed in
   action continues to decline as a result of the "surge" of troops into
   the area around Baghdad. Meanwhile, uncertainties about the economy
   tend to feed through into a preoccupation with health care. A majority
   of Americans (around 54% last year, according to the Kaiser Family
   Foundation, a Washington, DC, think-tank) get their tax-exempt health
   insurance through their employers, so losing a job often means losing
   cover. Even for those who remain in work, tightening market conditions
   are forcing employers to downgrade the insurance they offer.

   But when it comes to health care--as opposed to the economy, or
   security--voters are at least being offered clear choices. All the
   Democratic candidates, for instance, and none of the Republicans, are
   proposing some version of universal health coverage in an attempt to
   end the anomaly whereby some 47m people, a sixth of the population of
   the world's most powerful nation, have no health insurance. A
   YouGov/Polimetrix poll for The Economist this week shows that half of
   all voters would like to see everyone get coverage, even if that means
   a tax increase, with only 36% opposed (see chart). On the campaign
   trail in New Hampshire recently John Edwards, a Democrat, won waves of
   applause every time he threatened to take away the health insurance of
   members of Congress if they did not provide something similar for all
   Americans.

   There is, however, no consensus among Democrats on how to achieve
   universal cover. In fact, health has become a lively battleground in
   the increasingly edgy war between Hillary Clinton and Barack Obama--so
   much so that Robert Reich, who was labour secretary in Bill Clinton's
   administration, publicly rebuked her this week, adding that he thinks
   Mr Obama's model for reform is better than hers. Mrs Clinton (along
   with Mr Edwards, the third-ranked Democrat, but unlike Mr Obama) has
   proposed a detailed plan that relies on a "mandate"--a legal
   requirement that everyone have an approved form of insurance, just as
   they are required to have if they drive a car.

   The idea is to make sure that younger people, who may feel they are
   unlikely to get ill and can do without cover, are required to join the
   insurance pool, making it healthier and supposedly bringing down
   premiums. They will also be more likely to get preventive treatment at
   an early stage if they do get ill, rather than becoming expensive
   emergency cases later on.

   Mr Obama's supporters contend that there are problems with this model.
   First, people often simply ignore the mandate--usually because they
   cannot afford health insurance. Subsidies are to be made available
   under the Clinton and Edwards plans: but they will not cover everyone.
   And independent voices like Robert Reischauer's at the Urban
   Institute, another Washington think-tank, complain that many of the
   complexities in both these plans have yet to be worked out. Who will
   resolve disputes, of which there are certain to be many, between
   patients and government-approved insurance providers? What if people
   default on their payments? And will costs really come down? The
   experience in the only state to run a universal mandate so far,
   Massachusetts, has not been wholly positive (see [3]article).

   And, of course, mandates are perceived as bossy, which is why
   Republicans, in particular, hate them. Mr Obama's refusal to prescribe
   one may serve him well with centrist voters with bad memories of Mrs
   Clinton's first attempt at health-care reform in 1993-94, a political
   disaster on an epic scale. Mr Obama's plan focuses on providing a
   larger pot of cash to help the uninsured take out insurance, rather
   than trying to force them to do it.

   To Republicans, the Democrats' insistence on concentrating on
   universal care is perplexing. Of the 47m uninsured, perhaps 10m are
   illegal immigrants. Of the others, many will be younger people who
   simply choose not to have insurance. Others are only uninsured
   temporarily. Mitt Romney, the former governor of Massachusetts who set
   up its universal health scheme, does not want to extend it to the
   whole country now that he is running for the Republican presidential
   nomination rather than election in a liberal state. Arnold
   Schwarzenegger, California's Republican governor, favours mandates;
   but he is not running for the top job.

   Republicans prefer to concentrate on the cost side of health
   insurance, which makes sense. Health-care costs have risen, on
   average, 2.5 percentage points faster than GDP annually for four
   decades. That means, among other things, that the costs of the
   government-funded medical programmes--Medicare for the elderly and
   Medicaid for the poor--will bust the budget unless they are radically
   reformed. The Republicans further charge that Democratic plans to stop
   insurers excluding people with pre-existing medical conditions will
   hugely increase the cost of premiums.

   Republicans focus much more closely than the Democrats do on using
   market mechanisms to bring down costs. John McCain, for instance,
   suggests allowing more competition across state borders. Along with
   Rudy Giuliani and Mr Romney, he also favours a much wider use of tax
   deductions. This would allow more people than just those lucky enough
   to have jobs that offer health insurance to benefit from what is, in
   effect, a large government subsidy. Mr Giuliani, for instance, would
   allow those without employer-provided insurance a tax deduction of
   $15,000 to help buy it.

   Voters think cost is a bigger problem than coverage. But none of the
   Republicans is stressing health to the same extent as the Democrats
   are. Maybe that is why our poll shows almost twice as many people
   prefer the Democrats on the issue.

