
   The Democratic presidential candidates tout their ideas for reform

                                                                       AP

                                     AP

                       Obama listens to the diagnosis

   HOW do you devise a health-care plan that is sensible and centrist,
   yet also stands out from the rest? That is the question faced by all
   the Democratic candidates for the presidency. Health care is second
   only to the war in Iraq among voters' concerns, so everyone with an
   eye on the White House wants a winning answer.

   The three front-runners--Hillary Clinton, Barack Obama and John
   Edwards--have all promised to control costs and provide coverage for
   the 47m Americans without health insurance. All three have eschewed
   radical change. Instead, they are jostling over the centre ground: how
   to tweak America's predominantly private health-care system.

   Mr Edwards has long set the pace with an ambitious plan that nods at
   cost control but concentrates on insuring every American by 2012. Not
   unlike reforms already under way in Massachusetts and California, Mr
   Edwards's scheme promises an overhaul of insurance markets, subsidies
   to help poorer people pay their premiums and a legal requirement that
   everyone should buy health insurance.

   In a sop to the party's left, a government health scheme, such as
   Medicare, would compete with private insurers. Employers would have to
   provide their workers with health insurance or pay a tax. But the
   Edwards plan would still cost the federal government some $120 billion
   a year, money that would be raised by rolling back Mr Bush's tax cuts
   for the rich.

   In recent days Mrs Clinton and Mr Obama have begun to flesh out their
   alternatives. Scarred by the disasters of Hillary-care, her failed
   attempt to overhaul America's health system in 1993, Mrs Clinton is
   leery of laying out a Big Plan. Her preferred step-by-step approach
   has started with cost control; ideas for boosting coverage are
   promised in the coming weeks.

   Mrs Clinton offers a litany of well-known, but sensible, savings, such
   as shifting to electronic records, concentrating more on preventive
   medicine, improving the management of chronic diseases, and creating a
   "best practices institute" to set guidelines for optimal care. In all,
   she claims, $120 billion a year could be wrung out of the health
   system, money that could be used to pay for broader coverage.

   Mr Obama's plan, unveiled on May 29th, borrows from both his rivals'.
   Like Mrs Clinton, he concentrates on cost control. Mr Obama trots out
   the same litany of better disease management, electronic records and
   the like. He promises that the typical American family would save up
   to $2,500 in medical costs a year. Part of that, however, is gained by
   shifting expenses to the government. Borrowing an idea touted by John
   Kerry in 2004, Mr Obama says the federal government should reimburse
   private insurers for a share of any catastrophic health costs.

   The Obama path to universal coverage is a paler version of Mr
   Edwards's. It promises insurance-market reform, including the creation
   of a National Health Insurance Exchange, to act as a clearing-house
   for people to buy coverage, as well as an industry watchdog. Anyone
   without health cover at work could also buy into a new public-health
   plan, much like that for federal employees. Subsidies would help
   poorer Americans pay their premiums.

   Like Mr Edwards's, the Obama plan would levy a tax on firms that do
   not provide health cover. It would also demand an infusion of federal
   cash, to be paid for, yes, by rolling back some of the Bush tax cuts
   for the rich. Mr Obama's aides claim the price tag would be around $65
   billion a year, though other health experts think it would be higher.

   The big difference is that Mr Obama, unlike Mr Edwards, would not
   force people to buy health insurance. Only children would have to be
   covered. That soft-pedalling may please the unions, some of which
   dislike the idea of compelling workers to buy insurance. But it makes
   his plan both less efficient and less effective.

