
   Welcome attention to the real problem

   SENATOR JOHN McCAIN is famous for his straight talking, spelling out
   uncomfortable truths even when they do him political damage--whether
   on Iraq, torture, immigration or free trade. Now he has decided to
   deal with health care bluntly too: American health-care costs are much
   too high, he says, and the priority for any reform must be to bring
   them down.

   Speaking on the campaign trail in Iowa on October 11th, Mr McCain put
   cost front and centre as he unveiled his own health plan. He noted
   that General Motors spends more on health than it does on steel: the
   price of each of its cars includes more than $1,500 for health care.
   Toyota's health-care costs come to about $200 a car.

   The other candidates all mention cost, of course. But for those on the
   Democratic side, the priority in this election is not cost but
   coverage. Some 47m Americans lack any form of health cover, being
   neither poor nor old enough to qualify for government-funded health
   schemes, and having neither a generous enough employer nor sufficient
   financial resources of their own to pay for private health insurance.
   This, on average, now costs some $12,000 a year for a family of four,
   according to the Kaiser Foundation, a Washington think-tank.

   All the leading Democratic candidates have produced detailed plans for
   making coverage universal, involving subsidies for those who can't
   afford insurance and--at least in the case of Hillary Clinton's and
   John Edwards's plans--a legal requirement that everyone be covered.
   Even on the Republican side, plans produced by Rudy Giuliani and a few
   others focus more on using market mechanisms (not subsidies, as the
   Democrats prefer) to expand coverage than on overall costs.

   But cost plainly is the biggest issue. For the past four decades,
   American health-care costs have usually increased faster than the
   economy has grown, by an average of an extra 2.5% a year. Health care
   now consumes around 16% of America's entire GDP, a much higher
   proportion than in other industrial economies.

   Ever-rising costs of this kind are not sustainable. They damage the
   competitiveness of companies, one reason why the proportion of firms
   offering health care to their employees has been steadily falling,
   from 69% in 2000 to 60% now. And these figures do not capture the
   extent to which squeezed companies have been scaling back their health
   plans, obliging employees, for instance, to pay a higher share of
   treatment costs, or refusing to cover other members of employees'
   families.

   For people who must pay for their own insurance, rising costs have far
   outstripped increases in earnings (see chart). This has helped
   increase the number of uninsured. And for the government, which pays
   for the health-care costs of many children, the very poor, the
   retired, veterans and its own servants, the geometrically rising price
   of cover is inexorably busting the budget. By 2050, says Peter Orszag,
   director of the Congressional Budget Office (CBO), Medicare (the
   government programme for the elderly) and Medicaid (for the poor) will
   together consume some 20% of GDP--almost the same share as the entire
   federal budget now. Three-quarters of this rise, he says, is due to
   cost inflation, and only about a quarter to the ageing of America's
   population.

   Mr McCain does not pretend to be able to solve this problem, but he
   offers a number of mechanisms that will help. The most important is to
   shake up the insurance market, by, for instance, allowing
   health-insurance companies to tout for business across state lines.
   Insurance and pharmaceuticals companies collectively make some $80
   billion a year in profit, which may suggest that there is room for
   more efficiency.

   Mr McCain also wants to see much greater pooling of national data on
   best practices, a suggestion that chimes with the CBO's finding of
   vast discrepancies between costs for similar procedures across the
   country. He wants to see doctors rewarded according to results, rather
   than procedures, because he argues that the current system is stacked
   against preventive medicine. His plans are skimpy compared with those
   of, say, Mrs Clinton. But at least he is asking the right question.

