
   By neglecting its transport system, Chicago is gambling with its
   future

   AS A thriving midwestern city, Chicago is still the beating heart of
   much of America's industry. But its arteries--both road and rail--are
   increasingly clogged. A report released earlier this month by
   Illinois's auditor, William Holland, highlighted some chronic glitches
   in the network of buses and commuter trains. The region also needs a
   better approach to highways and rail freight.

   It is hard, of course, to co-ordinate commuter transport between an
   urban system and one that serves surrounding counties with a different
   tax base. Chicago's Regional Transportation Authority (RTA), which
   covers the six counties of the metropolitan area, is supposed to
   promote better planning and links among the city's system and a pair
   of others that run suburban train and bus networks. But it has clearly
   come up short so far. The RTA, Mr Holland's audit concluded, needs to
   wield a firmer hand, over budgets and in general.

   No matter how the RTA allocates the pie, however, the current pot of
   money seems woefully inadequate. Operating costs have grown three
   times as fast as revenues over the past five years. Last month the RTA
   released a five-year "strategic plan" (otherwise known as a request
   for money) that called for, among other things, an extra $400m in
   annual operating funds and $10 billion in capital spending over the
   next five years. That will be a tough sell in the state legislature.

   Freight traffic is arguably an even bigger problem. In this, Chicago
   is unique. Six of the country's seven biggest-earning railways
   converge there, and the city is still the hub for a staggering amount
   of trans-continental commerce. Managing logistics and supply chains
   for distant companies, as well as physically moving goods around at
   warehouses and inter-modal hubs, generates lots of jobs for the area.
   Chicago's ability to handle all this traffic is being badly stretched,
   however. Ann Drake, the head of DSC Logistics, says that west-east
   freight traffic continues to grow rapidly, as ever more goods from
   Asia try to make their way to the east coast.

   Ms Drake's worry--and that of many others--is that Chicago's
   congestion will eventually cause many shipments to be rerouted around
   it, a process that could eat away its advantages. "We do not want to
   become another St Louis," she says, gloomily invoking the city that
   lost its midwestern primacy to Chicago after failing to invest in
   infrastructure.

   Helpfully, many business and civic leaders are moving transport
   problems up their list of priorities. The Metropolitan Planning
   Council (MPC), which presses for a co-ordinated policy for the
   region's big issues, has done a good job of channelling their
   frustrations into useful ideas. But there is something odd about the
   way that many of Chicago's leaders talk about these problems. They
   invariably try to link their suggestions to grand or abstract ideas,
   such as being a "global city" or winning a bid to host the Olympics.
   The simpler need is to get goods and people moving.

   The awful state of Chicago's transport comes home most plainly to
   drivers sitting stationary in their cars. The public debate over
   making drivers pay to use the roads has been as shallow in Chicago as
   in the rest of America. The argument tends to revolve around whether
   it makes more sense to use tolls and private enterprise to pay for
   better roads, or instead to keep charging taxpayers for a system that
   just limps along. By contrast, not much is said about the role that
   prices might play in altering the behaviour of both companies and
   commuters. MarySue Barrett, president of the MPC, says that her outfit
   hopes to make road pricing a bigger part of that debate.

   Hostility towards road pricing might be understandable in other parts
   of America. But one of Chicago's proudest feats was the creation of
   financial futures markets, which prompted far-flung firms and farmers
   to adjust their behaviour to the slightest twitch in the price of pork
   futures or Canadian dollars. Surely the system would work for Chicago
   commuters as well.

