
   Let my people go
   "I cannot part the Red Sea, but I believe I can part the red tape."

   Mike Huckabee, a Baptist minister, replying to a question on
   government spending during a Republican presidential debate in Iowa,
   December 12th

   But how do you really feel?
   "Oh my God, no. Really?"

   A Joe Lieberman staffer upon learning that Mr Lieberman, a
   Democrat-turned-independent, is endorsing John McCain (a Republican)
   for president. [3]CNN.com, December 17th 

   Home wrecker or philanderer?
   A poll of women voters revealed that 40% think Judith Giuliani's
   affair with Rudy Giuliani, while he was still married to his previous
   wife, makes her less suitable to be first lady. Only a third think
   Bill Clinton's adultery makes him less suitable to be first laddie. 

   New York Daily News, December 17th 

   But on the other hand
   "I like the fact that his name is Barack Hussein Obama, and that his
   father was a Muslim and that his paternal grandmother is a Muslim."

   Bob Kerrey after endorsing Hillary Clinton. [4]Washingtonpost.com,
   December 16th 

   Never too early to recruit
   "Hillary, I'm looking forward to you advising me, as well."

   Mr Obama parries when asked about his reliance on former Clinton
   advisers while promising change during a Democratic candidates' debate
   in Iowa, December 13th 

   Republicanphobia
   "He seems like a nice charming guy. [Mike Huckabee] doesn't believe in
   evolution and has some nutty views about what it is we should do about
   ending violence in our inner city--we should make sure all of our
   young people are armed. Republicans scare me."

   Elizabeth Edwards, John Edwards's wife, revealing her not-so-secret
   fears in Iowa. [5]ABCNews.com, December 15th 

   Six-million-dollar man
   "Towards the end it was difficult to keep up with all the accounting."

   Ron Paul on raising so much money ($6m in one day) he isn't sure how
   to spend it. [6]CNN.com, December 17th 

   Just to be on the safe side
   "I know you're going to inspect me. You can look inside my mouth if
   you want."

   Mrs Clinton compares a livestock auction to presidential campaigning.
   Associated Press, December 16th

