
   Most commuters are miserable, but Chicago's may be the most
   beleaguered

                                                                       AP
                                                                       AP

                                                      It's hell on the El

   THE city's average commute is not quite America's longest (that honour
   goes to New York), but in one respect Chicago is unrivalled: the
   bitterness and passion of the argument surrounding its
   public-transport system.

   If the Illinois state legislature does not act by January 20th, more
   than half of bus routes in the city will be eliminated, some 2,400
   transport workers will be sacked and fares will be raised. Suburban
   rail and bus lines face cuts as well. Commuters will be forced to
   drive on already crowded roads or walk to a distant bus or train--this
   in the depths of winter, with pavements icy and kerbs surrounded by
   lakes of frigid slush. As America grapples with traffic, high fuel
   prices and climate change, public transport is often suggested as an
   antidote. But, as Chicago proves all too well, innovation in public
   services can easily be stymied by old-fashioned bickering.

   There is hope that Illinois's legislators will be more productive in
   2008 than they were last year, but this is not saying much. Last March
   the state's auditor published a bleak report about greater Chicago's
   transport network. Over the previous five years operating costs had
   risen faster than revenues--6.5% each year compared with 2.2%--and
   pensions for the city's transport workers were only 34% funded as of
   2006. Lawmakers spent most of 2007 bickering over how to raise more
   money, in vain.

   Now commuters face severe reductions in service. They were already
   threatened with two such "doomsdays" last autumn, but each time the
   governor of Illinois, Rod Blagojevich, used a quick infusion of cash
   to let the argument drag on. It is unclear whether he will be able to
   do so again.

   Through all this, there has been a ready solution. Julie Hamos, a
   state representative, proposed a bill that would raise Chicago's
   property transfer tax and increase the sales tax in the metropolitan
   region's six counties. Her bill also includes reforms to the pension
   system and the Regional Transportation Authority, resolving some of
   the problems that helped create the mess in the first place.

   But this sensible bill has been stalled by the usual in-fighting. The
   governor opposes a sales-tax increase and favours diverting the sales
   tax on gasoline from the general fund. (Congestion pricing, raising
   the petrol tax itself or getting the private sector involved are not
   even part of the debate.) And in the Illinois state legislature, many
   senators and representatives from rural and suburban districts have
   refused to help unless they get something in return. Politicians are
   now fighting over how to expand gambling to pay for capital projects,
   a brawl that seems likely to drag on for some time.

   Ineptitude on this scale comes at a heavy price. Hacking away at the
   public-transport system, America's second-biggest, will not help
   Chicago's bid to host the 2016 Olympics. And failing to invest in
   transport could be costing the region $2 billion a year, argues
   Chicago Metropolis 2020, a civic group. At a hearing in November,
   parents described how service cuts would force their children to walk
   to school through dangerous areas. Others explained how hard it would
   be to get to work. If Illinois's politicians were trying to
   demonstrate how not to tackle a serious issue, they could hardly do
   better.

