
   Health care for children arouses the president's mean streak

   NEITHER fiscal restraint, nor the veto pen, has characterised
   President George Bush's time in the White House. America continues to
   run a deficit, and Mr Bush has vetoed only three bills in his whole
   tenure. But now that he has a Democratic Congress to battle with, the
   president is promising to be tougher.

   Mr Bush has said he will turn away a bill that would expand the State
   Children's Health Insurance Program (SCHIP), a scheme that insures
   children from low-income families, which passed the House of
   Representatives on September 25th. He has also threatened to veto nine
   of the 12 appropriations bills that make up the federal budget,
   because the Democrats' budget plan exceeds his own by $22 billion.

   But SCHIP is extremely popular, and so is the bill that seeks to widen
   it to 4m more uninsured children. Since 1997, SCHIP has covered
   children in families that do not qualify for benefits under Medicaid,
   a programme for the very poor, but who still cannot afford health
   insurance. Under the scheme, the federal government gives a block
   grant to the states, which design their own benefits and eligibility
   criteria. The programme expires on September 30th.

   House and Senate negotiators crafted a renewal plan that would add $35
   billion to the programme's cost over five years and enable states to
   cover families with incomes at or above three times the poverty line
   in certain cases. Mr Bush claims that the reformed programme will
   attract families who already have private insurance into the state-run
   programme. The Congressional Budget Office (CBO) estimates that a
   third of families that would enroll would have access to private
   coverage. But Robert Greenstein, of the Centre on Budget and Policy
   Priorities, argues that crowding out is bound to occur as the
   government tries to cover more children.

   Mr Greenstein speculates that the president is really trying to force
   Congress to attach the health-care tax-incentive proposal he unveiled
   in January. An aversion to government-run health-care programmes and
   new taxes--a tobacco-tax increase would fund the SCHIP expansion--may
   also be driving Mr Bush's opposition. Or he may simply be trying to
   re-establish his credentials as a fiscal conservative.

   Whatever the truth, the White House has made an inauspicious start of
   its fight with Congress over federal spending. Battle royal will be
   joined in November.

