
   The front-runners fall back in the crucial first state to vote

   IN OCTOBER a group of Iowa Democrats gathered for a Barack Obama
   "house party". People were polite in Iowa, one guest explained, and
   they expected the same good behaviour from presidential candidates.
   But now, less than a month before the parties hold their nominating
   caucuses there on January 3rd, a slew of new polls have bad news for
   the front-runners, and the candidates have moved into attack mode.
   How, though, to sling their mud without upsetting Iowans?

   On the Republican side, Mike Huckabee, a former governor of Arkansas,
   has zoomed up to take a narrow lead over Mitt Romney, a former
   governor of Massachusetts, who had led in Iowa for months.
   Evangelicals, who will make up an estimated 40% of Republicans taking
   part in the caucuses, have rallied behind Mr Huckabee. He is
   resolutely conservative on social issues; he is not a Mormon like Mr
   Romney; and he is not lazy like Fred Thompson. But Mr Huckabee needs
   to build up his tiny Iowa organisation fast. If he goes in as the
   favourite and loses, he will have less chance of winning in other
   early-voting states, like New Hampshire, where his pitch is less
   attractive.

   Mr Huckabee's rivals are doing their best to draw attention to the
   smiling Arkansan's weaknesses. They are attacking him for wanting to
   subsidise university fees for the children of illegal immigrants in
   Arkansas, as well as for raising certain taxes during his time as
   governor. Mr Romney, in particular, will have to offer a substantive
   critique of Mr Huckabee's economic populism and lack of foreign-policy
   expertise if he is to repulse the Huckabee wave. Both in his
   conservative credentials and in his personal chemistry, the robotic Mr
   Romney cannot compete with the affable former Baptist minister.

   Meanwhile, the Democratic contest is now a tight three-way race
   between Hillary Clinton, John Edwards and Mr Obama. In some recent
   polls, Mr Obama has actually taken the lead. For the first time, the
   moving average compiled by [3]Real Clear Politics, a website, now
   shows both Mr Romney and Mrs Clinton dislodged from the Iowa top spots
   (see chart).

   In response, Mrs Clinton seems to be drifting to the left. In an
   interview with the Financial Times this week she turned more
   protectionist than ever, calling the Doha round of international trade
   talks into question. Her campaign has also begun questioning Mr
   Obama's integrity, using an essay he wrote in kindergarten entitled "I
   Want to be President" as evidence of overweening ambition.

   Mrs Clinton, who is still miles ahead in all national polls of
   Democrats, seemed to trip up in Iowa on December 2nd when she said
   that making personal attacks on Mr Obama was going to be "fun". That
   is just the sort of fun those polite Iowans don't like very much.

