
   Pressure is growing for a re-think of policy towards the island

   THE fading health of Fidel Castro, coupled with the advent of the new
   Democratic Congress, means that America is under growing pressure to
   change its tough stance towards Cuba. Before Christmas, a ten-member
   bipartisan congressional delegation travelled to that dangerous island
   for a series of meetings with senior Cuban government officials. "It's
   a time for change," says Jeff Flake, Republican of Arizona, who led
   the delegation. "There's a new dynamic now."

                                                                       AP

                                     AP

                      Change is the talk of Calle Ocho

   Both sides feel it. Since taking over from his invalid brother in late
   July, Raúl Castro has twice offered to open normalisation talks with
   America. Each time he has been tersely rejected. The Bush
   administration says it is not interested so long as either Castro
   brother is in power. Critics say the administration is ignoring
   political developments in Cuba, where Raúl is showing signs of a less
   doctrinaire style of rule. But promoting change in either capital is
   no easy task. For the past six years the Bush administration has
   fought off efforts in Congress to soften the embargo, using the
   Republican majorities there to defeat repeated attempts to alter its
   terms.

   That has now changed. The relevant committees in the 110th Congress
   are now headed by longstanding critics of the embargo. These include
   Charles Rangel, chairman of the House Ways and Means Committee, and
   Max Baucus, who heads the Senate Finance Committee. In the Senate Joe
   Biden of Delaware, a liberal and non-ideologue, has taken over the
   Foreign Relations Committee.

   William Delahunt, the Democrat who now heads the oversight panel of
   the International Relations Committee in the House, has already
   announced that he will hold hearings shortly into Cuban aid
   programmes. Other hearings could be held on scandal-plagued Radio and
   TV Martí, the Miami-based government broadcasting outlets directed at
   Cuba. A government report has already exposed flaws in aid to Cuba's
   tiny dissident movement, as well as in funding for anti-Castro
   projects in the United States.

   Critics say all these programmes have done a good job of fuelling the
   anti-Castro industry in Miami, while having little impact in Cuba.
   That, of course, has long been the dirty secret of America's Cuba
   policy. "The administration is not interested in Cuba, it is
   interested in Calle Ocho," says Philip Peters, vice-president of the
   Virginia-based Lexington Institute, referring to the main avenue that
   cuts through Miami's Little Havana district. Miami's Cuban-American
   electorate and campaign contributions have long been seen as
   politically vital, less because of their actual size than because of
   Florida's perennial importance as a big presidential swing state.

   In 2004, though, the Bush administration overreached itself. A
   presidential "Commission for Assistance to a Free Cuba" proposed
   increasing aid to the dissidents while imposing tight limits on cash
   remittances to relatives on the island. Cuban-Americans were also
   restricted to one trip to Cuba every three years, and to visiting
   "close" relatives only--not including aunts, uncles and cousins.

   But the travel and money limits, while popular with some hardliners,
   are disliked by many Cuban-Americans, especially those who have
   arrived in the past two decades and still have ties to family on the
   island. Many now advocate personal contacts as a useful vehicle for
   change.

   Last month, a group of Cuban exile organisations in Miami echoed the
   call for easing restrictions on travel and remittances. Consenso
   Cubano issued a report saying that the policy violated "fundamental
   rights of Cubans". It was endorsed by the influential, and extremely
   conservative, Cuban-American National Foundation. Four prominent
   dissidents in Cuba also signed a statement in late November asking
   America to lift its travel restrictions. American laws "in no way
   help" their struggle, they said. Will George Bush listen? It's not
   what he's best known for.

