
                                                             Getty Images

                                Getty Images

   Hillary Clinton's triumph in New Hampshire portends a thrilling race 


   LAST May, the Onion ran a picture of Barack Obama standing behind the
   junior senator from New York with the headline: "Hillary Clinton
   Threatened by Black Man". The spoof newspaper was prescient. On
   January 3rd in Iowa, Mr Obama walloped Mrs Clinton by eight percentage
   points. John Edwards, a former senator who blames greedy corporations
   for most of the world's troubles, nudged her into third place. The
   polls, which only last month put Mrs Clinton 30 points ahead
   nationally, suddenly showed her crashing towards oblivion. Mr Obama
   looked set to romp to the Democratic nomination.

   Hostile pundits waltzed on Mrs Clinton's political grave. "Thank you,
   Senator Obama," wrote Bill Kristol, a conservative columnist. "There
   will be no Clinton Restoration. A nation turns its grateful eyes to
   you." He danced too soon. Though the polls said she would lose heavily
   in New Hampshire on January 8th, she won, by 39% to 36%. "Together,
   let's give America the kind of comeback that New Hampshire has just
   given me," she beamed.

   The policy differences between the two leading Democrats are slight.
   Neither of them is George Bush. Both would pull American forces out of
   Iraq as soon as circumstances allow. Both would fight climate change.
   Mrs Clinton promises universal health insurance; Mr Obama would make
   it nearly universal. But this is not what excites their supporters.

   As the Onion suggested, the contest is flavoured by race and sex.
   Democrats would love to pick America's first black president. They
   would also love to pick its first female one. But they cannot do both;
   at least not this year. So they must choose. If women, who are a
   majority of the electorate, want first and foremost to put one of
   their own in the Oval Office, that obviously favours Mrs Clinton.
   There are not nearly as many black voters as female ones, but there
   are plenty of whites who yearn to prove that they are not racist. Mr
   Obama makes such people feel good about themselves.

   Mrs Clinton does not have the same soothing effect on male voters; for
   some, quite the opposite. But she is more experienced than her rival,
   having advised a president (her husband) for eight years. She also has
   awesome stamina, an orderly mind, a terrific organisation and a will
   to power that would make Nietzsche sit up and take notice.

   She met her loss in Iowa with her customary steel. She modified her
   stump speech, trying to sound more empathetic by talking softly and
   taking more questions from the audience. And she stepped up what she
   once called "the fun part" of the campaign--attacking her opponent.

   She poured scorn on his inexperience. It is not enough to hope for
   change, she said; you have to work for it. The idea that Mr Obama can
   live up to expectations is "the biggest fairy tale I have ever seen,"
   said her husband. Mrs Clinton zapped Mr Obama for flip-flopping. He
   used to favour universal health insurance, she said; now he doesn't.
   He opposed the Iraq war but voted to pay for its continuation.

   Mrs Clinton's speeches still include a long and slightly tedious list
   of micro-policies. She cannot whip up ecstasy the way Mr Obama does.
   But governing is not about making pretty speeches, say her supporters.
   It is about getting things done. That, of course, is what Republicans
   said when a certain slick young governor of Arkansas ran against
   George Bush senior, a sitting president, war hero, former ambassador
   and former head of the CIA.

   The day before the New Hampshire vote, Mrs Clinton looked sad and
   vulnerable. Someone asked how she coped. "It's not easy," she said,
   growing teary-eyed. "I couldn't do it if I just didn't passionately
   believe it was the right thing to do." Of possible defeat she said: "I
   just don't want to see [America] fall backwards."

   Victory in New Hampshire tossed her a lifeline when she was expecting
   a whack on the head with a boathook. Many people support her because
   they think she is the best woman for the job. But some do so only
   because they think she is the Democrat most likely to beat the
   Republican nominee in November. Many of her donors, too, open their
   wallets in the hope of future access to power. Had she lost two states
   in a row, those wallets would have started snapping shut.

   Mrs Clinton's remarkable comeback took place in the same state where
   her husband labelled himself "the Comeback Kid" after coming second in
   1992. As a candidate, the brilliant but disorganised Bill Clinton
   benefited hugely from his wife's complementary talents: her discipline
   helped keep him focused. With roles reversed, it ought to be harder.
   Bill cannot easily lend Hillary his charisma. But the political
   machine the two Clintons built together can work for either of them.

   And that machine does seem to have made the difference. If the exit
   polls are right, there was no late surge of people suddenly deciding
   to support Mrs Clinton. Her real advantage was among those who made up
   their mind more than a month ago, a group she won by 48% to 31%. So
   the pre-election polls were wrong, not because people changed their
   minds at the last moment, but because telephone pollsters
   underestimated Mrs Clinton's ability to drive and drag her supporters
   to the polling stations, argues Jay Cost of [4]RealClearPolitics.com,
   a political website.

   The exit polls also suggest that Mrs Clinton won New Hampshire by
   winning over traditional types of Democrat. She beat Mr Obama among
   registered Democrats, people over 40, union families, voters without
   college degrees and families making less than $50,000 a year. Mr Obama
   won the independents who voted in the Democratic primary, the
   first-time voters, the young, the college-educated and the well-off.
   Voters who said they were falling behind economically opted for Mrs
   Clinton; those who feel they are getting ahead preferred Mr Obama's
   more upbeat message.

   And the biggest change since Iowa was that Mrs Clinton, who lost the
   female vote to Mr Obama there, won it back convincingly in New
   Hampshire, by 46% to 34%. Mr Obama won the male vote by 40% to 29%,
   but more women than men showed up to vote (57% to 43%).

   The polls suggest that Mrs Clinton could win the next race, in Nevada,
   and Mr Obama will win South Carolina, which has a large black
   population. Anything might then happen on February 5th, when more than
   20 states vote. Both candidates have the cash and the fame to compete.
   But the momentum is back with Mrs Clinton. The dynasty is not dead, at
   least not yet.

