


   Can America ever escape from the shadow of 1968? 

   AMERICA is greeting the New Year with a spasm of nostalgia for an old
   one. Tom Brokaw's new book, "Boom!", is a virtual reunion of the class
   of '68 (the high point is a photograph of the young Dick Cheney
   astride a motorbike and wearing shades). Newsweek has dubbed 1968 "the
   year that changed everything". On December 30th the Washington Post
   quoted David Maraniss, one of the best chroniclers of the 1960s,
   waxing lyrical about '68: "there was a mood that anything was
   possible, good or bad, that life was changing by the week...it was
   kind of dizzying and exhilarating and tragic."

   For once the baby-boomers can be forgiven their nostalgia. 1968 was
   indeed one of the most significant years in American history. Martin
   Luther King and Robert Kennedy were assassinated within two months of
   each other. The Tet offensive turned public opinion against the
   Vietnam war. Cities burned and students revolted. The Democratic
   convention in Chicago collapsed in riots and confusion.

   1968 was the anvil that shaped the political legacy of the sixties.
   The Democratic Party marginalised itself by shifting decisively to the
   left on everything from the war to sexual politics. The Republican
   Party hit on its great winning formula--presenting itself as the
   champion of the "silent majority" against long-haired lefties and
   revolting students. The year ended with almost 60% of Americans voting
   for either Richard Nixon or George Wallace, a Southern segregationist.

   The Republicans and Democrats have replayed these themes ever since.
   The Republicans have caricatured the Democrats as Harvard Yard
   hippies. Hence all those congressional votes on flag-burning and other
   dire threats. The Democrats have accused the Republicans of repeating
   the mistakes of Vietnam in Iraq. One reason why conservatives hate
   Bill Clinton so much is that they think he embodies the narcissism and
   self-indulgence of the 1960s. (The man even named his daughter after a
   Joni Mitchell song.) One reason why liberals hate George Bush so much
   is that they think he and his frat-boy kind should have been swept
   aside by the youth-quake of 1968.

   They are replaying those themes still in the current election. John
   McCain, who spent the late 1960s as a prisoner of war in Vietnam, has
   chided Hillary Clinton for earmarking $1m for a Woodstock concert
   museum ("I wasn't there...I was tied up at the time"). John Edwards
   often seems to be channelling the spirit of Robert Kennedy--at least
   of the RFK who transformed himself after his brother's death from
   hard-assed cold warrior to liberal hero. Like RFK, he has made ending
   the war his signature tune; he is focused on ending poverty; and he
   has spent much of his time campaigning in inner cities and rural
   backwaters.

   But there is also something else going on in this campaign; a longing
   to escape from the shadow of 1968. Barack Obama makes much of the fact
   that he is too young to have played a part in the Kulturkampf of the
   1960s. He has pointedly complained that "Senator Clinton and others,
   they've been fighting some of the same fights since the sixties, and
   it makes it very difficult for them to bring the country together to
   get things done."

   Move on

   Can America at last break free of the 1960s? Much obviously depends on
   which candidates the parties pick. Mrs Clinton is most likely to give
   the old culture warriors a chance to fight the battles of 1968 again.
   Mr Obama is the most likely to re-scramble American politics in
   unpredictable ways. But, even if the Democrats go with Mrs Clinton,
   there are some reasons for hoping that politics will be more than just
   a replay of that year.

   The first is that the Democratic Party has decisively kicked the habit
   of self-marginalisation that it acquired in 1968. It has replaced
   cultural liberalism with a studied cultural conservatism (too much so
   on the issues of ending the death penalty and of gun control, both of
   which it now studiously ignores). Mrs Clinton has supported banning
   flag-burning. Both Mr Edwards and Mr Obama support big increases in
   the military budget.

   The second is that Nixon's strategy of defending the moral majority
   against the cultural elites is running out of steam. The Republican
   candidates have had their fair share of divorces. Rudy Giuliani has
   embraced New York values when it comes to abortion and homosexual
   unions. The populism that is catching fire this year is old-fashioned
   economic populism rather than Nixon-style cultural populism--and it is
   catching fire across both parties. Both Mr Edwards, a Democrat, and
   Mike Huckabee, a Republican, have powered their campaigns by
   championing ordinary people against greedy corporations.

   The final reason is that, for all the endless comparisons between
   Vietnam and Iraq, America has changed greatly since 1968. Students are
   worried about getting good jobs rather than changing the system. The
   anti-war demonstrations have been insignificant compared with the
   draft-fuelled marches of the 1960s. The counter-culture has long ago
   made its peace with capitalism. Some 150m Americans, half the
   population, have been born since January 1st 1969.

   The biggest difference is with race relations. In the wake of King's
   murder, riots erupted in 125 cities: 46 people were killed, 2,500
   injured and 21,000 arrested. Soldiers set up machinegun-turrets on the
   steps of the Capitol. Black radicals like Stokely Carmichael pledged
   to "end this non-violence bullshit". Today America's race relations
   are utterly transformed. There are still far too many blacks in
   poverty or in jail. But there is also a thriving black middle class. A
   conservative Republican president has made a black woman who grew up
   in the segregated South his secretary of state. Mr Obama is
   campaigning for president as a post-racial candidate. 1968 was indeed
   a remarkable year, but it is time for a new template for American
   politics.

