
   The rise and fall of the shopping mall

                                                             Getty Images

                                Getty Images

   THE Southdale shopping centre in Minnesota has an atrium, a food
   court, fountains and acres of parking. Its shops include a Dairy
   Queen, a Victoria's Secret and a purveyor of comic T-shirts. It may
   not seem like a landmark, as important to architectural history as the
   Louvre or New York's Woolworth Building. But it is. "Ohmigod!" chimes
   a group of teenage girls, on learning that they are standing in the
   world's first true shopping mall. "That is the coolest thing anybody
   has said to us all day."

   In the past half century Southdale and its many imitators have
   transformed shopping habits, urban economies and teenage speech.
   America now has some 1,100 enclosed shopping malls, according to the
   International Council of Shopping Centres. Clones have appeared from
   Chennai to Martinique. Yet the mall's story is far from triumphal.
   Invented by a European socialist who hated cars and came to deride his
   own creation, it has a murky future. While malls continue to multiply
   outside America, they are gradually dying in the country that
   pioneered them.

   Southdale's creator arrived in America as a refugee from Nazi-occupied
   Vienna. Victor Gruen was a Jewish bohemian who began to design shops
   for fellow immigrants in New York after failing in cabaret theatre.
   His work was admired partly for its uncluttered, modernist look, which
   seemed revolutionary in 1930s America. But Gruen's secret was the way
   he used arcades and eye-level display cases to lure customers into
   stores almost against their will. As a critic complained, his shops
   were like mousetraps. A few years later the same would be said of his
   shopping malls.

   By the 1940s department stores were already moving to the suburbs.
   Some had begun to build adjacent strips of shops, which they filled
   with boutiques in an attempt to re-create urban shopping districts. In
   1947 a shopping centre opened in Los Angeles featuring two department
   stores, a cluster of small shops and a large car park. It was, in
   effect, an outdoor shopping mall. Fine for balmy southern California,
   perhaps, but not for Minnesota's harsh climate. Commissioned to build
   a shopping centre at Southdale in 1956, Gruen threw a roof over the
   structure and installed an air-conditioning system to keep the
   temperature at 75°F (24°C)--which a contemporary press release called
   "Eternal Spring". The mall was born.

   Gruen got an extraordinary number of things right first time. He built
   a sloping road around the perimeter of the mall, so that half of the
   shoppers entered on the ground floor and half on the first
   floor--something that became a standard feature of malls. Southdale's
   balconies were low, so that shoppers could see the shops on the floor
   above or below them. The car park had animal signs to help shoppers
   remember the way back to their vehicles. It was as though Orville and
   Wilbur Wright had not just discovered powered flight but had built a
   plane with tray tables and a duty-free service.

   Oddly, this most suburban American invention was supposed to evoke a
   European city centre. Hence Southdale's density and its atrium, where
   shoppers were expected to sit and debate over cups of coffee, just as
   they do in the Piazza San Marco or the Place Dauphine. Gruen exiled
   cars, which he thought noisy and anti-social, to the outside of his
   mall. Most contemporary critics thought Gruen had succeeded in
   bringing urbanity to the suburbs. Southdale was "more like downtown
   than downtown itself", claimed the Architectural Record. Another
   asserted, in a rare example of journalistic hyperbole that turned out
   to be absolutely right, that the indoor shopping mall was henceforth
   "part of the American way".

   As Jeffrey Hardwick explains in his excellent biography, Gruen did not
   believe his creation would take business away from downtown shopping
   districts. He saw it as an adjunct to them. If indoor shopping centres
   harmed any businesses, Gruen dearly hoped it would be the fast-food
   stands and tacky strip malls that were sprouting like weeds along main
   roads. Southdale's first tenants shared this sanguine view. When it
   opened it was filled not with national chains but with second branches
   of downtown merchants.

   By the 1970s malls were proliferating. Gruen toured America promoting
   his invention. Malls began to open in Europe too--where, Gruen was
   presumably surprised to learn, they were seen as quintessentially
   American. At home, two developments speeded their growth. The first
   was a change in the tax code which allowed investors to write down a
   large proportion of a new building's cost as a loss. That made malls
   much more profitable. The second was a widespread property-tax revolt
   that deprived local governments of their most reliable source of
   income. Desperate, they tried to lure businesses that they could milk
   for taxes. They were particularly keen on shopping malls.

   Tribes of the mall

   By the early 1980s indoor shopping centres were woven tightly into
   American culture. New cuisines (the term is perhaps too grand) emerged
   in them, thanks to chains like Cinnabon and Panda Express, which did
   not exist outside malls. They began to swell to the point of
   absurdity. Canada's West Edmonton Mall, which opened in 1982, has an
   ice-skating rink, a pool with sea-lions and an indoor bungee jump. The
   Mall of America, in Minnesota, has three rollercoasters and more than
   500 shops arranged in "streets" designed to appeal to different age
   groups. Every morning it opens early to accommodate a group of "mall
   walkers" who trudge around its 0.57-mile perimeter for exercise.

   Artists and urban anthropologists began to note the appearance of
   mall-based tribes. Most celebrated--and lampooned--were the Valley
   girls who congregated in California's Glendale Galleria. Frank Zappa's
   then-teenage daughter, Moon Unit, wrote a hit song that captured their
   argot ("ohmigod!", "no biggie", "grody to the max", "total space
   cadet") and praised the Galleria for having "like, all these, like,
   really great shoe stores". Mall-oriented films followed, spreading the
   Valley girls' culture like spores in the wind.

   Just as the onward march of malls began to seem unstoppable, though,
   things began to go wrong. In just a few years they turned from temples
   of consumption to receptacles for social problems. The changing
   attitude to shopping malls can be seen in two films, both of which,
   appropriately, are to cinema what Panda Express is to the Chinese
   culinary tradition.

   George Romero's "Dawn of the Dead", released in 1978, is ostensibly a
   story about a group of people struggling to survive in a world taken
   over by flesh-eating zombies. But it is also a commentary on the lurid
   appeal of shopping malls, which were then multiplying quickly. That
   becomes clear a third of the way through the film, when the humans
   must decide where to take refuge. They rule out the cities, which are
   thick with monsters. Yet they need food, water and fuel, which are
   hard to find in the wilderness. They decide to head for a suburban
   shopping mall.

                                                             Getty Images

                                Getty Images

                      Southdale in its gleaming heyday

   There are a few zombies at the mall when the refugees arrive,
   staggering about aimlessly in a fashion familiar to Christmas
   shoppers. As one character explains, the monsters seem to have been
   drawn there by instinct: the mall was clearly an important place in
   their lives. Most of the humans are similarly intoxicated by the
   variety of goods on display. That worries the film's heroine, Fran.
   "I'm afraid," she says. "You're hypnotised by this place, all of you.
   It's all so bright and neatly wrapped that you don't see that it can
   be a prison." Nonsense, replies her boyfriend: "We got everything we
   need right here!" The rest of the film bears out the horror-movie
   dictum that nervous young women are always right.

   In 1995 a much gloomier vision of the shopping mall appeared. If "Dawn
   of the Dead" suggested malls were monstrously appealing, Kevin Smith's
   "Mallrats" depicted them simply as magnets for dysfunctional youth.
   The film chronicles the mundane adventures of four young men who come
   to a New Jersey mall to hang out, complain about their girlfriends and
   annoy security guards. The shopkeepers loathe them because, as the
   manager of Fashionable Male, a clothes shop, puts it, they lack a
   "shopping agenda". Indeed, they lack much of an agenda at all. In Mr
   Smith's mall everybody is a kind of zombie. As the film's tagline
   explained: "They're not there to work. They're not there to shop.
   They're just there."

                                                  [spacer.gif] [gray.gif]
                                                             [spacer.gif]
       So many shopping malls have died or are dying that a new hobby has
                                  appeared: amateur shopping-mall history
                                                             [spacer.gif]
                                                               [gray.gif]

   By the 1990s malls were in trouble. Having bred too quickly, they
   began to cannibalise each other. (Turn left out of Southdale's car
   park and the first building you pass is another shopping mall.)
   Discount shops, factory-outlet stores and category killers like Toys
   "R" Us ate into their profits. As middle-aged shoppers began to
   disappear, the teenagers who had inhabited malls from the beginning
   became more noticeable, which only made things worse. In 1998 Good
   Housekeeping ran a story entitled "Danger at the Mall". Indoor
   shopping malls are now so out of favour that not one will be built in
   America before 2009 at the earliest, according to the International
   Council of Shopping Centres.

   One reason for the malls' problems is that the suburbs have changed.
   When the Southdale shopping centre opened on the outskirts of
   Minneapolis, the suburbs were almost entirely white and middle-class.
   Whites were fleeing a wave of new arrivals from the South (the black
   population of Minneapolis rose by 155% between 1940 and 1960).
   Although Gruen could not bear to admit it, his invention appealed to
   those who wanted downtown's shops without its purported dangers. These
   days, in Minneapolis as in much of America, the ethnic drift is in the
   opposite direction. The suburbs are becoming much more racially mixed
   while the cities fill up with hip, affluent whites. As a result,
   suburban malls no longer provide a refuge from diversity.

   So many malls have died or are dying that a new hobby has appeared:
   amateur shopping-mall history. Like many esoteric pursuits, this has
   been facilitated by the internet. Websites such as [3]Deadmalls.com
   and [4]Labelscar.com collect pictures of weedy car parks and empty
   food courts and try to explain how once-thriving shopping centres
   began to spiral downward. Some of the recollections are faintly ironic
   or gloating. Yet the strongest note is anguish. Implausibly, these
   online histories reveal the deep emotional connections that people can
   establish with malls.

   One of the most touching is a [5]website devoted to Lakehurst mall
   near Chicago, which was demolished in 2004. Prodded by a local
   journalist, women and a few men write in with memories of
   back-to-school shopping trips, ear piercings, first jobs at Cinnabon
   and Orange Julius, early dates and even marriage proposals. Many are
   bereft at the mall's demolition, as though suffering the death of a
   pet. "You don't realise how much you miss something until it is gone,"
   writes one. Others are almost apologetic: "If only we knew what we
   had, we would never have strayed to other malls."

   As shopping malls decline, they sometimes come to resemble the civic
   centres that Gruen intended them to be. Attracted by cheap rents,
   community groups and police stations move in. On a trip to one of
   Gruen's creations, the now-desolate Carousel Mall in San Bernardino,
   your correspondent encountered a group of middle-aged Mexicans
   studying for the American citizenship test.

   Not all malls have suffered from competition and the suburbs'
   transformation. Some have prospered by appealing to growing
   ethnic-minority groups. American malls are courting middle-class
   Latinos by adding butchers' shops and, in some cases, by decking
   themselves out to resemble Mexican villages. La Gran Plaza, in the
   Texas town of Fort Worth, lays on mariachi and reggaeton acts and is
   building a rodeo. Other malls changed their clientele without
   adjusting their look. Brent Cross shopping centre, one of Britain's
   earliest malls, now contains shops staffed by second- and
   third-generation Asians selling to new arrivals from eastern Europe.

   The mall goes downtown

   Yet without white, middle-aged women few British or American shopping
   centres could survive. One bold attempt to lure them back can be seen
   at the corner of Third Street and Fairfax Boulevard in Los Angeles.
   The Grove shopping centre, which opened in 2002, performs all the
   functions of a mall without looking at all like one. Like Southdale,
   it has fountains, flowers, piped music and a good selection of
   underwear. But the Grove is open to the elements, the plants are real
   and, rather than vaguely evoking a town centre, it is actually done up
   to look like one. Or rather (this being Los Angeles) a fantasy amalgam
   of several town centres.

   Among the Grove's 40 or so buildings are a Caribbean house with
   shutters and a wooden balcony, an Art Deco cinema and a grand Beaux
   Arts building that houses a branch of the clothes shop Abercrombie &
   Fitch. Its fountains are choreographed to songs by Frank Sinatra and
   Sammy Davis junior. Every few minutes a tram trundles through the
   shopping centre. The tram's driver rings his bell almost constantly,
   because the other thing that distinguishes the Grove from an
   old-fashioned mall is that it is nearly always packed.

   The Grove was built by Rick Caruso (below), a dapper man who owns
   eight shopping centres in southern California and has three more under
   way. His next project, a 16-acre development with a large public
   square, apartments and lots more fountains, will open in 2008 next to
   the Glendale Galleria. He also plans to build an open-air shopping
   centre by a race track in the city of Arcadia, where the weary will be
   transported from shop to shop in a horse-drawn carriage. It is a sign
   of the popularity of his developments, as well as the bleak future of
   conventional malls, that the owners of nearby shopping centres are
   fighting hard to stop him.

                                                             Getty Images

                                Getty Images

                   Rick Caruso and his "lifestyle centre"

   Mr Caruso doesn't think he builds malls. The industry term is
   "lifestyle centres"; he calls his creations simply "streets". Nor can
   he claim to have invented the outdoor shopping centre. Before Gruen's
   revolutionary designs, all shopping centres were open to the sky. But
   Mr Caruso has brought the open-air mall to a pitch of ersatz
   perfection. It is partly thanks to him, and particularly the Grove,
   that every new shopping centre built in America next year will be
   roofless (and several traditional shopping malls will tear off their
   roofs). Open-air centres will appear not just in temperate places like
   southern California but also in muggy Houston and frigid
   Massachusetts.

   The mix-and-match appearance of the "lifestyle centres" is thought to
   be key to their appeal. Mr Caruso and his designers visit cities as
   diverse as Savannah and Capri to measure buildings and try to capture
   their appeal. Architectural styles are jumbled together with the aim
   of creating a festive, holiday atmosphere which people go to hang out
   in and end up spending money. "After all," says Mr Caruso, "you buy
   things when you're on holiday that you wouldn't buy otherwise." But Mr
   Caruso also claims, more boldly, that his creations are more "real"
   and authentic than conventional shopping centres.

   It is an odd claim for a man whose signature style is a mish-mash of
   two continents' and several centuries' worth of architectural
   traditions. But, like Gruen half a century ago, Mr Caruso has a bold
   vision for his developments. Indeed, his vision is rather similar to
   Gruen's. Like the Austrian émigré, Mr Caruso believes that people are
   naturally gregarious, and that America has failed to provide them with
   places that meet their social needs. Like Gruen, he claims to be
   trying to create not just profitable shopping places but also more
   perfect city centres.

   There is one crucial difference. Gruen wanted to improve upon the
   American city centre by modernising and Europeanising it. Mr Caruso,
   by contrast, looks to the past. He has tried to re-create a kind of
   prelapsarian downtown where there is no crime or homelessness. His
   romantic evocations of city centres are possible only because people
   have forgotten what downtowns used to be like. And they have
   forgotten, of course, largely because of the suburban shopping malls
   that Gruen built. It was necessary to kill the American city centre
   before bringing it back to life.

