
   Some helpful subsidies from Harvard and Yale 

   WEAK dollar or no, $46,000--the price for a single year of
   undergraduate instruction amid the red brick of Harvard Yard--is
   expensive. But nowadays cost is no barrier to entry at many of
   America's best universities. Formidable financial-assistance policies
   have eliminated fees or slashed them deeply for needy students. And
   last month Harvard announced a new plan designed to relieve the
   sticker-shock for undergraduates from middle and even upper-income
   families too.

   Since then, other rich American universities have unveiled similar
   initiatives. Yale, Harvard's bitterest rival, revealed its plans on
   January 14th. Students whose families make less than $60,000 a year
   will pay nothing at all. Families earning up to $200,000 a year will
   have to pay an average of 10% of their incomes. The university will
   expand its financial-assistance budget by 43%, to over $80m.

   Harvard will have a similar arrangement for families making up to
   $180,000. That makes the price of going to Harvard or Yale comparable
   to attending a state-run university for middle- and upper-income
   students. The universities will also not require any student to take
   out loans to pay for their tuition, a policy introduced by Princeton
   in 2001 and by the University of Pennsylvania just after Harvard's
   announcement. No applicant who gains admission, officials say, should
   feel pressured to go elsewhere because he or she can't afford the
   fees.

   None of that is quite as altruistic as it sounds. Harvard and Yale
   are, after all, now likely to lure more students away from previously
   cheaper options, particularly state-run universities, enhancing their
   already impressive admissions figures and reputations.

   The schemes also provide a model for structuring university fees in
   which high prices for rich students help offset modest prices for
   poorer ones and families are less reliant on federal grants and
   government-backed loans.

   Less wealthy private colleges whose fees are high will not be able to
   copy Harvard or Yale easily. But America's state-run universities,
   which have traditionally kept their fees low and stable, might well
   try a differentiated pricing scheme as they raise cash to compete
   academically with their private counterparts. Indeed, the University
   of California system has already started to implement a sliding-fee
   scale.

