
   Health care is a bigger problem than poverty in America

   WITH an election looming, even the driest documents can spark fury.
   Hillary Clinton expressed "outrage" at the news contained in the
   Census Bureau's latest report on income, poverty and health insurance
   in the United States, which was released on August 28th. Barack Obama
   said it represented "a betrayal of the ideals we hold as Americans".
   John Edwards, reviving a well-worn theme, said it confirmed that there
   are "two Americas". To anyone not running for president, however, the
   report contained both good news and bad.

   The good news is that the average American is a little better off, and
   the proportion of Americans who are poor has dwindled a little. Real
   median household income rose by 0.7% from 2005 to 2006, to $48,201.
   And the official poverty rate fell from 12.6% to 12.3%. The bad news
   is that the number and proportion of Americans who lack health
   insurance continued to climb, from 44.8m (15.3%) to 47m (15.8%).

   Together, these numbers hardly represent the disaster leading
   Democrats say they do, but neither are they cause for unrestrained
   glee. Median household income is still below its peak in 1999, and has
   grown more slowly than income per head, as the rich have gained more
   than those in the middle. Confusingly, even as median incomes rose,
   median earnings for full-time workers fell by about 1% between 2005
   and 2006. The explanation is that more people are working longer
   hours.

   This lends itself to the sound-bite that Americans are working longer
   hours for lower wages, but that may be misleading. It is not clear
   that the same people are being paid less for the hours they work.
   Rather, it may be that more unskilled people are starting to work
   full-time instead of part-time or not at all, and therefore bringing
   down the average, says Gary Burtless of the Brookings Institution, a
   think-tank. The census data also fail to take account of George Bush's
   generous tax cuts, which have boosted take-home pay. On the other
   hand, they are too old to reflect the fallout from this year's market
   turmoil, which could be grave.

   The poverty figures are both less accurate and more hopeful. It sounds
   awful to say that 36.5m Americans are living in poverty. But "poverty"
   in America, as defined by the Census Bureau, does not mean
   destitution. A typical poor American lives in a three-bedroom house
   with a car, air-conditioning and two televisions. His children
   actually eat more meat than rich kids do. And he receives substantial
   benefits that the census bizarrely excludes from its calculations.

   Americans are deemed poor if their pre-tax income falls below a
   certain threshold--for example, $20,614 for a family of four. By this
   measure, the proportion of Americans who are poor is no better today
   than it was in the 1970s. But this is nonsense. The census ignores
   non-cash benefits such as government health insurance, food stamps and
   subsidised housing. It also ignores the earned-income tax credit, a
   wage subsidy for the working poor that is reckoned to be one of
   America's most effective anti-poverty measures. On the day the census
   report appeared, Michael Bloomberg, New York's mayor and a possible
   independent presidential candidate, called for a huge expansion of the
   earned-income tax credit and a serious re-think of how poverty is
   measured.

   This week's gloomiest news concerns health insurance. As medical costs
   soar, more firms are opting not to provide their staff with coverage.
   The government provides insurance for the poor and the elderly through
   monster programmes called Medicaid and Medicare. But that still leaves
   a big hole in the safety net, through which a swelling crowd of
   Americans is falling. Many states have tried to stitch up the hole by
   expanding Medicaid to include people who are not quite poor, and by
   enrolling more children in the federally funded State Children's
   Health Insurance Programme (SCHIP).

   This is expensive, however. On August 17th the Bush administration
   imposed new restrictions to curb costs. Several states allow children
   to join SCHIP if their family income is as much as 250% of the poverty
   line. But under the new rules, states will have to demonstrate that
   95% of children with family incomes below 200% of the poverty line are
   enrolled before they can raise the bar to 250%. Whereas it makes sense
   to try to reach the poorest first, the 95% target is unattainable,
   says John Colmers, the secretary of health in Maryland. Poor families
   are often too disorganised to fill in forms, and many are illegal
   aliens shy of any contact with officialdom.

   The uninsured can still see a doctor by going to a hospital emergency
   room. But, as a glance at the crowded waiting area of the Johns
   Hopkins hospital in Baltimore reveals, that usually means a long wait.
   The uninsured often "don't seek help until they are really sick," says
   Ed Beranek, a director at the hospital. "By the time they arrive, that
   cold has turned into pneumonia." For lack of timely preventive
   measures, the uninsured get sicker than they need to and cost more to
   treat. That extra cost is then passed on to everyone else who uses the
   hospital.

   The politicians agree that the system is dysfunctional, but disagree
   on how to fix it. Democratic presidential candidates are pushing for
   universal coverage largely through greater public spending. The
   Republicans want to tinker with the current system to make private
   insurance more affordable. Rudy Giuliani, the Republican front-runner,
   says people should be able to buy insurance from any state, not just
   their own. That should make the market more competitive. Mitt Romney,
   another Republican, says that individuals should be allowed to buy
   health insurance with pre-tax dollars. (Currently, and unfairly, only
   employer-provided health insurance gets this tax break.) Critics note,
   however, that increasing the subsidy will surely stoke yet more
   health-care inflation.

