
   Southern states are eager to boost trade with Cuba

   THE docks in Mobile, Alabama's only seaport, are crammed with lumber,
   steel coils, frozen chickens, coal and much else. But few of these
   products are bound for Cuba, just 550 nautical miles (1,000km) away.
   The state port authority's director, James Lyons, hopes this will
   change. "We're trading with Vietnam, we're trading with China. These
   are both communist states," he says. "It's silly to have tense
   relations with a neighbour that close."

   Mr Lyons is hardly the only Southerner who would be glad to see the
   end of America's 45-year embargo on trade with Cuba. Trade delegations
   from Alabama, Mississippi and other Gulf states have been descending
   on Cuba in recent years, hoping for a slice of a potentially lucrative
   market. Currently only agricultural products and medicines may be
   exported from America (with no Cuban imports permitted). Before 2000,
   when the embargo was loosened, nothing was allowed.

   In 2005 Alabaman companies did roughly $140m in trade with Cuba,
   according to Ron Sparks, the state's agricultural commissioner, who is
   aggressively pursuing Cuban business. "We've sold cotton, we've sold
   cookies, crackers, fruit juice, mayonnaise, mustard, salad dressing--a
   lot of processed foods," says Mr Sparks. Over half of all chickens
   exported from America to Cuba come from Alabama, along with almost all
   the (wooden) telephone poles. The owner of one Alabaman pole-making
   business, which first shipped utility poles to Cuba after Hurricane
   Charley in 2004, says that competition is fierce for the Cuban
   business, especially since a large-scale electrification project in
   Cuba has boosted demand. Helpfully, Alabama has no powerful
   pro-embargo lobby of Cuban exiles like the one in Florida.

   Volume would be higher still if the embargo were lifted. In Mobile,
   the port's trade with Cuba amounts to only a few thousand tons a
   year--a fraction of its 50m ton (45m tonne) annual average. Just one
   or two ships a week leave for Cuba, as against six or seven in the
   pre-Castro days. "There's all manner of things that could be
   exported," says Mr Lyons--roofing materials, machinery, cars, even
   paint, none of which is currently allowed. Exports from America, it is
   reckoned, could easily treble from the current $350m or so a year.

   More agricultural goods could also be shipped, but "there are a lot of
   people who just don't want to fool with all the paperwork," says Mr
   Lyons. Many extra hassles complicate trade with Cuba. Americans cannot
   travel there freely, so many businessmen attach themselves to state
   officials as part of a delegation (and still must get permits from
   Washington). Payment is also an issue. Americans cannot accept money
   from Cubans directly, so setting up a third-party payment procedure is
   necessary. The transaction must be in cash (which some Americans
   regard as a plus). Ships cannot head directly from Cuba to the United
   States, though sometimes extra paperwork can circumvent this.

   Even if the embargo were to be lifted tomorrow, Mr Lyons cautions that
   trade would not boom immediately. "They don't have the currency to buy
   what they need," he says. But trade works both ways--so how about some
   Cuban cigars and rum for America?

