
   Hillary Clinton unveils a promising health plan

   AFTER months of preparation, Hillary Clinton this week finally put
   forward her new plan to provide health coverage for all Americans.
   Crucially, she did it without calling for the large government
   bureaucracy envisaged by her earlier attempt at reform in 1993, dubbed
   "Hillarycare" by its detractors.

   Barack Obama and John Edwards were quick to dismiss her plan this
   week, but that may be because her well-crafted effort improves on
   theirs. The three Democratic candidates' plans are similar in that
   they all aim to help the 47m or so uninsured to get coverage. However,
   they differ in important details (see chart).

   The most important component of Mrs Clinton's plan is its universal
   mandate. All individuals will be required to purchase health insurance
   if they are not already covered, just as under a new programme in
   Massachusetts (and under Mr Edwards's plan). This matters because
   without such a mandate, many young and healthy people opt out, raising
   the cost of insuring the remaining, sicker people. Mr Obama slips
   around on this point, invoking a mandate only for children.

   That is because he knows such mandates can be unpopular with many
   middle class voters, for whom insurance can prove too expensive. To
   help ease this crunch, the Massachusetts reform plan offers targeted
   subsidies as well as a rejigging of the insurance market with the aim
   of ensuring inexpensive, "bare bones" coverage packages are on offer.

   Mrs Clinton tackles this problem of affordability in several ways. Her
   plan also offers subsidies to help the poor buy insurance. Individuals
   can either buy insurance from private firms directly, through a scheme
   that currently serves federal employees or from a new scheme modelled
   on and administered by Medicare, a government programme that treats
   the poor. (The non-poor would have to pay to join the new programme,
   which would compete with private health providers.) Most strikingly,
   she envisages imposing a cap on the maximum premium that any family
   would have to pay for health insurance: beyond a certain (as yet
   unspecified) share of household income, the family would get
   subsidies.

   The other half of Mrs Clinton's mandate affects employers. Like her
   Democratic rivals, she plans to oblige all firms to offer health
   insurance to workers. Many big firms already do so because the federal
   government provides a tax subsidy for employer-provided health
   insurance (but, unfairly, not for insurance purchased by self-employed
   individuals). But even with this break, small firms often cannot
   afford to offer coverage, and bigger ones are being forced to cut
   back.

   Mr Obama excludes small firms from his mandate. Mr Edwards insists on
   a "pay or play" provision: if firms do not offer coverage they must
   pay what is in effect a payroll tax. Mrs Clinton uses both carrots and
   sticks. She uses the payroll tax approach with big firms, but gives a
   subsidy to small businesses to encourage them to offer health
   insurance. The sum of all these parts, argues Jason Furman of the
   Hamilton Project, a policy outfit in Washington, DC, is "a
   substantively good and politically clever" health plan.

   But how much will all this end up costing? About $110 billion per
   year, Mrs Clinton's team reckons. One way she intends to pay for that
   is to roll back George Bush's recent tax cuts for the richest people.

   She has also unveiled a series of proposals over the past six months
   that encourage savings in the health sector to offset much of that new
   cost: improved efficiency, greater use of information technology,
   electronic medical records, improved quality of care and so on.
   Independent experts agree that big savings in those areas are
   possible, but caution that reform will not be easy to implement.

   But what if those ambitious savings do not come quickly, or if the
   subsidies end up costing much more? Regina Herzlinger of Harvard
   Business School applauds Mrs Clinton's push for universal coverage,
   but cautions that the cost of her approach may be closer to $150
   billion-200 billion per year. If so, would the plan then require a
   vast expansion of Medicare or huge new taxes--Hillarycare by the back
   door, as some critics say?

   Not necessarily, argues Mr Furman. He observes that alone among her
   rivals, Mrs Clinton has dared to propose reforming the employer tax
   break for providing health insurance. Jonathan Gruber of MIT
   calculates that this tax distortion costs the taxpayer $225 billion a
   year--money he thinks could be redeployed to scale up the
   Massachusetts experiment nationally.

   For now, Mrs Clinton proposes scaling back the tax break only for the
   richest Americans, those whose households earn more than $250,000 a
   year. That would save only a few billion dollars a year, but it would
   establish that this indefensible but hugely popular tax distortion is
   no longer untouchable. In time, the proposal could prove to be the
   thin end of a wedge that overturns that benefit altogether, freeing up
   a large kitty that could finance the move to universal care.

