
                                                                       AP

                                     AP

   John Edwards trails in third place. But his policy ideas are shaping
   the Democratic presidential race 

   HE STRIDES into an Iowa primary school where more than a hundred
   people have skipped their lunch to hear him, wearing jeans and
   flashing a smile that could sell toothpaste. He begins, as always, by
   mentioning his wife, who was diagnosed with incurable cancer in March.
   "She's doing great." But within seconds, John Edwards dives into the
   details of his health-care scheme. Then on to questions. The subjects
   range from high medical costs to the influence of Iran. "Here's what I
   think," he answers, before launching into a detailed plan to fix the
   problem.

   Mr Edwards is a man of big plans. No other presidential candidate, of
   either party, can match the sheer quantity, let alone the ambition, of
   his policy ideas. He has grand, progressive, goals--to end the war in
   Iraq (obviously), provide universal health care, address global
   warming, eliminate poverty in America within 30 years--and detailed
   blueprints of how to do it all.

   All this is a big change from 2004, when he first ran, unsuccessfully,
   for the Democratic nomination and then (equally unsuccessfully) as
   John Kerry's vice-presidential running-mate. Those campaigns were
   built around his youthful charm, made-for-politics biography (the son
   of a mill-worker in North Carolina; the first member of his family to
   go to college) and a rousing stump speech about "two Americas", one
   for the rich and one for the rest.

   His life-story loomed large because the dashing former trial lawyer
   was short of both substance and political experience. He was a
   one-term senator with a silver tongue and populist touch but an
   unremarkable legislative record. (He voted against two of George
   Bush's three tax cuts but for the war in Iraq.)

   Four years on, his experience of government is still thin. Having left
   the Senate in 2004 he has spent less time making laws (six years) than
   Barack Obama, who was a state senator for eight years and has been a
   senator in Washington for two and a half. But Mr Edwards is no longer
   a policy neophyte. Instead, he has positioned himself as the voice of
   his party's left wing. He renounced his support for the Iraq war in
   2005 (Mr Obama never supported it, however) and has been a powerful
   critic since. He has steeped himself in progressive causes,
   particularly the battle against poverty, founding a centre at the
   University of North Carolina to study ways to combat deprivation. And
   he has assiduously built ties with the unions.

   The transformation on Iraq is the most dramatic. Mr Edwards wants
   American soldiers out fast (an immediate reduction of 40,000-50,000,
   followed by an "orderly and complete" withdrawal of combat forces
   within a year). He excoriates Congress and his Democratic rivals for
   failing to force the president's hand by denying funding for the war.
   "Congress has a responsibility to force George Bush to end this war,"
   he intones in every speech. No serious Democratic candidate is more
   searing in his condemnation of America's present course. (The war on
   terror is a "bumper-sticker, not a plan", he mocks.)

   But far from turning inward to concentrate on domestic problems, he
   wants to "re-engage the world with the full weight of [America's]
   moral leadership". That demands change at home, notably on global
   warming, but also commitments abroad. Enough troops should stay near
   Iraq to "prevent a genocide, deter a regional spillover of the civil
   war, and prevent an al-Qaeda safe haven". He wants a big increase in
   foreign aid and a "Marshall Corps" of 10,000 bankers, political
   scientists and other experts to help failing states. There is a
   dissonance here. How can Mr Edwards pull out of Iraq while also
   forestalling the re-emergence of al-Qaeda? But for all his efforts to
   woo the anti-war wing, he is free of the isolationist flavour of most
   populist politicians.

   Champion of the poor

   On economics, too, the Edwards brand of populism is hard to
   pigeonhole. With roots in the textile mills and strong links to the
   unions, he is regarded as the most protectionist of the Democratic
   front-runners--though the margins are narrowing fast as Hillary
   Clinton stages a retreat from her husband's embrace of free trade.

   He offers plenty of standard populist cant: lots of talk about
   "fairness"; rants against oil firms for price gouging and drug
   companies for rocketing health costs; and--this year's favourite
   villain--anger at mortgage lenders for ripping off poor home-owners.
   (He calls it the "wild west of the credit industry, where...abusive
   and predatory lenders are robbing families blind.") A recent speech
   decried an economy that rewarded "wealth not work", a tax system that
   favoured the rich and a government that served only special interests.
   Yet for all that Mr Edwards is less a redistributionist firebrand than
   a big-government do-gooder. He is intent on helping the poor more than
   soaking the rich; his inspiration is Robert Kennedy, not Huey Long.

   The Edwards campaign openly evokes RFK's 1968 presidential bid, which
   combined vocal opposition to an unpopular war with a telegenic focus
   on alleviating poverty. Mr Edwards launched his candidacy outside a
   wrecked house in New Orleans's ninth ward. This week he spent three
   days on an anti-poverty tour, one that finished, not uncoincidentally,
   in Prestonburg, Kentucky, where Kennedy ended his own poverty tour 40
   years ago.

   Look beyond the unsubtle imagery, however, and Mr Edwards's
   anti-poverty plan is an intriguing mix. His goals are bold--to cut
   America's poverty rate of 12.6% by a third within a decade--but the
   means are mainstream. His policy arsenal includes expanding the Earned
   Income Tax Credit, a kind of negative income tax that tops up the
   earnings of poorer Americans; giving poor people "work bonds" to boost
   their saving; and providing 1m housing vouchers to help poor families
   move to better neighbourhoods. Policy wonks argue about whether these
   ideas, particularly housing vouchers, will work, but they could all
   have come from a centrist Democratic think-tank.

   The combination of bold goals and mainstream means is evident in two
   other Edwards plans: health care and energy reform. And it is why his
   campaign, regardless of its electoral fortunes, is shaping the
   Democratic race. Unable to dismiss his proposals as crazy radicalism,
   the other candidates have to be both bolder and more detailed than
   they would like.

   Consider health. Mr Edwards released his ideas for universal insurance
   in February, almost two years before election day. He steered clear of
   the approach favoured by the party's left--a single-payer system, like
   Canada's or Britain's. Instead his plan has ingredients that were
   introduced in Massachusetts by Mitt Romney, now a Republican
   presidential candidate: an overhaul of insurance markets, subsidies to
   help poorer people pay their premiums, taxes on firms that do not
   provide health-care coverage for their workers, and a requirement that
   everyone should buy health insurance.

   His proposal does nod to the left: a government health scheme, akin to
   Medicare, would compete with private insurers, potentially opening the
   door to a single-payer system if everyone chose to join the public
   scheme. But it does not seem threateningly radical. As a result, it
   has become the standard against which other Democratic candidates are
   judged. Mr Obama, who recently released a paler version of the Edwards
   ideas, was criticised for not requiring people to buy health
   insurance.

                                                                       AP
                                                                       AP

                                                   How it ended last time

   On global warming, too, the Edwards campaign has set the pace. He
   wants to reduce America's greenhouse-gas emissions by 80% before 2050
   with a cap-and-trade system of carbon permits. He also touts reforms
   of the electricity grid, improvements in energy efficiency and vast
   investment in renewable energy. Those targets match the toughest bill
   now in Congress. Mrs Clinton and Mr Obama signed on to this bill soon
   after the Edwards energy plan was released.

   These ideas do not come cheap. Universal health care will cost some
   $90 billion-$120 billion a year; the poverty plan $15 billion-$20
   billion; the renewable energy fund another $13 billion (though the
   auction of carbon permits and elimination of subsidies for oil firms
   should cover some of that). Add in a rag-bag of other ideas and you
   easily reach some $150 billion of new spending a year, well over 1% of
   GDP. That, however, is about what the Iraq war is currently consuming.

   Plainly, the new spending will require higher taxes. Mr Edwards has
   been more willing than his competitors to admit that he will go beyond
   the Democrat commonplace of rolling back Mr Bush's tax cuts for those
   making over $200,000. He has hinted at raising the tax rate on capital
   gains, arguing that it is "not right" for income from wealth and work
   to be treated differently. Recently he became the first presidential
   candidate to endorse Democratic lawmakers' efforts to end the
   preferential taxation of "carried interest", a tax loophole for
   private-equity firms and hedge funds.

   The three Hs

   Raising taxes on hedge funds fits the image Mr Edwards is trying for.
   But it also points to his biggest weaknesses, known as the "three Hs".
   The working-class hero worked for a hedge fund, earning $479,000 as a
   consultant for Fortress Investment Group last year; he is building a
   28,000ft (2,600 square metre) house; and he charged two $400 haircuts
   to his campaign.

   An expensively coiffed mansion-builder is all too easy to ridicule as
   a champion of the poor. And the haircut gaffe echoes the reputation
   for preferring style to substance that dogged Mr Edwards in 2004.
   (Judging by a gaggle of schoolteachers in Iowa, the pretty-boy problem
   has not gone away. "Can I lift up his coat?" giggled one as she waited
   for a photograph.)

   By and large, though, Iowa Democrats are buying Mr Edwards's brand of
   populism. He has campaigned hard there, visiting the state more than
   20 times in the past two years. His strategy depends on doing well in
   the first-off Iowa caucuses, and at present he leads the pack in polls
   there, though Mrs Clinton is closing in fast. Nationally, Mr Edwards
   trails far behind Mrs Clinton and Mr Obama, both in polls and the race
   for cash. He raised only $9m between April and June, compared with Mr
   Obama's $32.5m.

   Surprisingly, perhaps, Mr Edwards's brand of populism seems to appeal
   to Republicans. When pitted against Republican candidates in polls, he
   scores better than the other Democratic front-runners. But it is the
   primaries that matter, and there Mr Edwards must hope for one of the
   others to stumble. If Obamamania fades, or the Clinton machine stalls,
   an Edwards nomination is just possible. But even if the man himself
   does not make it, the Democrats' presidential platform will be shaped
   by Mr Edwards's plans.

