


   Can the president achieve anything before he leaves the White House? 


   FEW presidents have a pleasant time of it in their last year in
   office. Their chickens come home to roost. Their political capital
   dries up. Their advisers start worrying where their next pay cheque
   will come from. The entire country is fixated on the question of who
   will replace them.

   Woodrow Wilson was humiliated by America's failure to join the League
   of Nations and then incapacitated by a stroke. Dwight Eisenhower was
   haunted by Sputnik and his multiplying medical problems. Ronald Reagan
   and Bill Clinton had to deal with the fallout from Iran-Contra and
   Monica Lewinsky respectively.

   George Bush is likely to have a better year than Wilson (he is
   remarkably fit for a 61-year-old), but a worse one than most other
   presidents. Yet 2007 was a surprisingly good year after the debacles
   of 2006. The "surge" in Iraq proved fairly successful--and vindicated
   Mr Bush's decision to back his own judgment against the collective
   wisdom of the Iraq Study Group. The White House also played a
   successful defensive game against the Democratic-controlled Congress,
   outmanoeuvring it on everything from Iraq funding to the federal
   budget to energy bills to wire-tapping. Mr Bush blocked the expansion
   of a children's health insurance programme of which he disapproved. He
   is now talking about ending his presidency "in a sprint".

   This is unlikely. Mr Bush has little going for him in 2008. Only one
   in three Americans thinks that he is doing a good job. Almost all of
   his closest political advisers have decamped. Congress is determined
   to get its revenge and block anything that he sends it. And in reality
   he has much less than a year to play with. Congress leaves for its
   summer break in August (thereafter it will do little but pass
   appropriations bills). If the Republican Party chooses a champion in
   the next couple of months, he will to some extent cede the leadership
   of his party; if it fails to choose a champion, as many people are now
   speculating, the country will be agog at the prospect of a party
   convention at which the nomination is still up for grabs. Mr Bush's
   last chance to command the national spotlight may come as soon as the
   state-of-the-union address on January 28th.

   And, with his power ebbing, he faces a mountain of problems at home
   and abroad. The economy is softening. A wave of foreclosures is
   damping consumer spending and spreading anger. The fires of populism
   are burning ever more brightly. There are widespread calls for a
   stimulus package to revive the economy.

   More than most presidents, Mr Bush is also a hostage to foreign events
   over which he has little control. The current implosion in Pakistan is
   just one more reminder of the instability of the greater Middle East.
   If the surge continues to be successful, Mr Bush will have some reason
   for self-congratulation; if it falters and fails, he will leave office
   a broken man.

   Mr Bush has no choice but to pursue a modest domestic agenda. The man
   who once mocked his predecessor for playing "small ball" is doing just
   that. The White House talks about focusing on "kitchen table" issues
   such as tweaking the health-care system. Mr Bush even recently
   travelled to Chesapeake Bay to announce federal protection for two
   species of fish, the striped bass and the red drum.

   But there are nevertheless a couple of matters that qualify as a bit
   more than "small ball". Mr Bush will do his best to defend the two
   most important domestic achievements of his first term--the No Child
   Left Behind Act (which aims to raise standards in schools and which
   needs to be reauthorised) and his tax cuts (which are due to expire in
   2010). He will argue that extending the tax cuts is the best way to
   revive a slowing economy. He will also dare the Democrats to resist
   his "stimulus package" and risk being blamed by voters for a
   recession.

   Mr Bush is also determined to push through what is left of his trade
   agenda, including pacts with Colombia and South Korea. But much of his
   energy will be spent trying to block China-bashing legislation in
   Congress. This year is likely to see rising anxiety about the economic
   and military threat from China, as the publicity surrounding the
   summer Olympics in Beijing confronts Americans with yet more evidence
   of China's rise.

   Mr Bush's last year will be dominated by foreign policy. This is
   partly inevitable--he is fighting wars in Iraq and Afghanistan as well
   as a more general "war on terror". But it is also a matter of choice.
   Most presidents decide to escape from their domestic bonds in their
   final year--particularly if they face a hostile Congress and an
   unforgiving press corps--and Mr Bush is no exception.

   Mr Bush will fly to Israel in the next few days (his first visit there
   as president) in order to build on the momentum of November's
   Annapolis summit. He will also visit other places in the region,
   including the West Bank, Saudi Arabia and Egypt. A month later he will
   travel to Africa. Mr Bush also has several global summits on his
   agenda--ranging from a NATO meeting in Romania in April to an
   Asia-Pacific economic summit in Peru--as well as a visit to the
   Beijing Olympics in the summer. The White House explains the
   president's new-found Wanderlust by saying that "We want to be well
   perceived in the world".

   Reagan and Mr Clinton both offset their domestic troubles with big
   foreign initiatives at the fag end of their presidencies--Reagan by
   negotiating with Mikhail Gorbachev and Mr Clinton by throwing himself
   into trying to bring peace to Ireland and the Middle East. Mr Bush is
   unlikely to be so successful. He is widely unpopular in the Arab
   world, and the Palestinians are in no fit state to negotiate. As for
   the White House's wish to be "well perceived in the world", the less
   said the better.

   But his trip to Africa might prove surprisingly successful--and might
   highlight one of his unsung achievements. The Bush administration has
   allocated $15 billion to fighting HIV and AIDS in Africa and $1.2
   billion to prevent the spread of malaria. Partly because of this
   Africa is one of the few parts of the world where America's reputation
   has remained high during the Bush years.

   Africa will be the highlight of an otherwise dismal year. Mr Bush
   always wanted to be a "transformational" president. Most of his last
   year will be spent on the back foot--defending his tax cuts and
   dealing with the consequences of his "transformation" of Iraq. The
   rest will be small ball.

