
   Not yet: the Obama spell is stronger than that 


   ONE certainty emerges from the confusion of Iowa and New Hampshire:
   Barack Obama is still the shiniest star in the political firmament.
   The citizens of Iowa and New Hampshire are not a particularly
   demonstrative bunch. In Iowa they pride themselves on their Midwestern
   common sense; New Hampshirites on their ornery independence. But Mr
   Obama has stirred them as they have seldom been stirred before.

   People turned up in their thousands to listen to his speeches. They
   lined up for hours. They filled his every venue to the rafters. They
   high-fived and chanted ("fired up, ready to go"). They thrilled to his
   rhetoric. Mouldering old political hacks declared that they had not
   seen anything like this since JFK.

   The magic worked well in Iowa. Mr Obama rode a wave of young voters
   and independents to a smashing victory. Then, in New Hampshire, it did
   not work quite so well. Mr Obama's loss to Hillary Clinton was all the
   more painful because almost everybody (including the Clintons
   themselves) expected him to win handsomely. However this setback,
   dramatic though it is, should not be allowed to obscure his
   achievements.

   Mr Obama is a first-term senator--a man who was so unknown eight years
   ago that he could not even get a floor pass to the 2000 Democratic
   convention--who has fought the formidable Clinton machine to a draw.
   What had looked for months like Hillary's coronation will now be a
   real fight for the crown.

   But he has done more than this: he has rewritten the terms of the 2008
   race. Mr Obama was the first person to put "change" at the heart of
   his campaign. Now everybody--Republican as well as Democrat--has leapt
   on to the change bandwagon. Mrs Clinton promises "smart change". John
   Edwards promises "real change". John McCain touts his record of
   changing Washington from within. In the twinned Republican and
   Democratic debates on January 5th the presidential candidates used the
   word "change" 120 times.

   His achievements are undoubted. But how lethal is the "reality check"
   of New Hampshire? Is the magic Obama train about to hit the buffers,
   or is the candidate tough enough to keep it steaming ahead through
   what now promises to be a long hard contest?

   Mr Obama has demonstrated a unique ability to invoke passion among his
   supporters. This is partly because at his best he may be the finest
   public speaker of his generation: a man who echoes John Kennedy and
   Martin Luther King but nevertheless speaks in a voice that is all his
   own. It is not just that he says it well: it is also what he says.

   Mr Obama has three great themes--change, reconciliation and hope.
   America is broken, he argues, ruled by lobbyists and hated around the
   world. The polls show that many Americans agree (see chart and [4]full
   poll details). The way to fix this is not by fighting the partisan
   political wars even harder but by creating a national movement for
   reform that embraces independents and disillusioned Republicans. The
   force that will bring about this change is hope: the very same force
   that has brought about all the great changes in American history, from
   the emancipation of the slaves to the civil-rights movement. Or so the
   devotees say.

   Mr Obama's supporters regard him as a transforming figure. He can,
   they claim, cure America's partisan divisions with the help of the
   fact that he is a newcomer to Washington who reaches out to
   independents and Republicans (Mr Obama himself says that he is running
   for the presidency now because he did not want to stay in Congress for
   so long that "all the hope was boiled out of him"). He can repair
   America's image in the world, they believe, because he is himself a
   global citizen who spent some of his childhood in Indonesia and is the
   son of an African father and grandson of a Muslim.

   Deeper than all this is the question of race. Mr Obama never dwells on
   racial reconciliation. When he mentions emancipation and civil rights,
   it is alongside women's and workers' rights. He does not need to speak
   about black-white reconciliation because he embodies it. The largely
   white crowds who have been flocking to him over the past few
   weeks--Iowa and New Hampshire are only about 2% black--see him as a
   way of making amends for America's racist past. The gangly man on the
   stage has the power to forgive past sins and unite a house that has
   been divided.

   But the promise of "transformation" that so excited the voters in Iowa
   was clearly not enough in New Hampshire. The Clintons threw everything
   that they could at the "hope" machine. Mrs Clinton demanded a "reality
   check". What, she asked, is the point of high hopes if you do not have
   the experience to deliver them? Bill Clinton talked about "fairy
   tales". Various critics argued that a great orator can still emit
   nothing but hot air. Probably the setback was inevitable: election
   campaigns cannot be conducted in terms of pure poetry for ever.

   An end to poetry

   Mr Obama now faces two big problems. The first is that his rhetoric is
   a waning asset. Everyone now knows that he is a wonderful speaker. But
   can he produce anything but golden words? He needs to show that he can
   excel at prose as well as poetry. It is striking how many people
   turned up to his meetings in New Hampshire and came away moved but not
   converted. They admired his talent but did not think that he addressed
   their problems.

   His second trouble is that important groups of Democratic voters are
   immune to Obamamania. His message goes down fine with the
   college-educated crowd: young and liberal professionals who want to
   hear a statement about what sort of country they live in. It goes down
   less well with blue-collar workers and older people who want somebody
   who can solve meat-and-potatoes problems. For them Mr Obama is too
   young and too inexperienced: a pretty talker rather than a problem
   solver.

   Democratic primaries have traditionally been unkind to inspirational
   liberals. The likes of Eugene McCarthy and Howard Dean were carried
   forward on a wave of hope for a while before they collapsed in
   confusion.

   Yet there are a few reasons for thinking that Mr Obama may prove a
   more enduring candidate. The vote in New Hampshire was too close to
   qualify as a rejection. Voters want a proper contest in which they can
   consider their options; they do not want a coronation either of Mrs
   Clinton or of Mr Obama. And Mr Obama is a more appealing, and better
   organised, character than those "inspirational" predecessors.

   The vote for the president is the most personal vote that Americans
   cast: a vote for a person rather than a party or ideology. Mr Obama's
   personal story speaks directly to America's sense of itself as a land
   of opportunity and upward mobility. His father abandoned him when he
   was two. He was partly brought up by his grandparents. He drifted for
   a while and experimented with drugs. But then he pulled himself
   together. He was the first black president of the Harvard Law Review.
   He wrote two best-selling books. He rejected black-identity politics
   for the richer theme of multiculturalism and racial reconciliation. He
   has risen to the summit of American politics by his mid-40s without
   the help of family connections.

   Mr Obama is also the ideal anti-Bush candidate. Americans tend to look
   for a president who is different from his immediate predecessor--they
   chose Ronald Reagan after Jimmy Carter and Bill Clinton after George
   Bush senior--and Mr Obama is as different from George Bush as you can
   get. For a start, he is an outsider who didn't inherit power. Mrs
   Clinton, by contrast, is half of a political dynasty that has been at
   the heart of America's partisan wars for as long as many people can
   remember.

   Mr Obama is tough. He thrived in the world of Illinois politics, one
   that is dominated by entrenched political machines that pride
   themselves on their bare-knuckle tactics. His first bid for the House
   of Representatives collapsed in disaster but four years later he was
   running for the Senate. His chief political adviser, David Axelrod, is
   one of the best in the business.

   He came out against the "dumb" war in Iraq at a time when Mr Bush's
   approval ratings were sky-high and leading Democrats such as Mrs
   Clinton and John Kerry were voting for it. In the Senate he
   concentrated on building political capital for a presidential run
   rather than on accumulating a legislative record (which frankly looks
   a little thin). He had the audacity to go ahead even though the
   establishment was telling him to wait his turn.

   Perhaps the most striking thing that he has going for him is that the
   Republicans seem more frightened of his message of "hope" than of Mrs
   Clinton's message of "experience". They are well geared up for adding
   a few more points to Mrs Clinton's already lengthy list of political
   negatives. Mr Obama is an unknown quantity. His race makes him
   difficult for the Republicans to attack, and he is better than she is
   at wooing wavering Republicans. Despite New Hampshire, the battle
   between hope and experience has only just begun.

