
   The latest targets for insurers

   YOUNG people are hard to pin down. They graduate from school. They
   jump between employers, or in and out of employment. They leave their
   parental home for a shared flat, a friend's couch, or a house they can
   scarcely afford. They move to New York, San Francisco, Portland, or
   even Austin.

   And so they often wander away from the comforts of health-care
   insurance. According to the Census Bureau, almost 30% of Americans
   between the ages of 18 and 34 are uninsured. For people aged 45 to 64
   the number is just 14%.

   A healthy young person seldom requires medical attention. So forgoing
   insurance is an understandable decision. But some of those who roll
   the dice lose. A serious illness or accident can be financially
   ruinous, and lead to sub-standard care.

   Having more healthy young people in the insurance pool would benefit
   insurers, because they are less likely to make big claims. But efforts
   to attract them have thus far been feeble. Various companies offer low
   monthly premiums aimed at the young. But they typically have high
   deductibles--the amount the subscriber has to pay out of his own
   pocket before insurance kicks in. So young people tend to shy away
   from them.

   One company, however, is taking an interesting new approach. In
   September Precedent Insurance--a division of the American Community
   Mutual Insurance Company--brought out a line of Coverage on Demand
   plans. The plans are currently available only in Texas, which has a
   higher percentage of uninsured people than any other state. They offer
   low premiums, low deductibles, limited benefits, and a clever twist.
   If you exhaust your benefits but need more coverage, you can pay an
   additional "activation fee" and get more, even after you get ill or
   hurt. There are four levels of cover. To get to the fourth requires at
   least a cumulative $9,000 in activation fees. But it then provides the
   subscriber with up to $5m in coverage.

   The activation fees for the higher levels are steep, but a lot better
   than bankruptcy. According to Mike Grandstaff, the company's chief
   executive officer, they only make sense if you are, in fact, in
   reasonably good health. If you are likely to need more than the first
   level of coverage, the plan is not really economical.

   Even people who plan on staying well may prefer more comprehensive
   health-care insurance. The Precedent plans do not cover, for example,
   costs associated with a normal pregnancy. This is to discourage women
   who plan on becoming pregnant shortly after signing up. But it is, of
   course, hard luck on a woman with an unplanned pregnancy. Perhaps she
   could hope that the father works for the government and is in a
   marrying mood.

   Young people have it tough. It remains easier for politicians to rally
   around the cuddly or wrinkly. This was apparent this week, as
   Democrats denounced a "cruel" George Bush for vetoing, on October 3rd,
   the reauthorisation and expansion of the State Children's Health
   Insurance Programme (SCHIP). This federal programme provides insurance
   for 6.9m children from low-income families by providing blocks of
   money to the states, which disburse it. SCHIP began in 1997 and
   expired on September 30th, although Congress has already extended it
   for six weeks while the political wrangling continues.

   A bipartisan majority in the House and Senate passed a plan that calls
   for $35 billion in additional spending on SCHIP over the next five
   years, only to see it vetoed as expected. The plan would have upped
   the number of children covered to 10m. Mr Bush opposed the scheme
   mainly on cost grounds (though Democrats say this rings false, given
   how much he is wasting on the Iraq war) and accused him of wantonly
   denying children health-care insurance. This week they plainly won the
   political advantage. But curing America's health-care system will take
   more than political point-scoring and limited fixes. It will require a
   degree of political co-operation that is not now available.

