
   The ex-Veep lectures Congress


   GLOBAL-WARMING sceptics, says Al Gore, are looking at a burning cradle
   and speculating that perhaps the baby is flame-resistant. Testifying
   before Congress on March 21st, the former vice-president was as
   cautious and understated as any other movie star. Mankind faces "a
   planetary emergency", he said; "a crisis that threatens the survival
   of our civilisation and the habitability of the Earth."

   He proposed a series of measures that might ward off the environmental
   apocalypse. First, freeze America's level of carbon dioxide emissions
   immediately, and then reduce it by 90% by 2050. Second, tear up the
   tax code. Without altering the total tax burden, Mr Gore thinks
   America should replace taxes on employment and production with taxes
   on pollution, particularly carbon dioxide.

   Third, use public money to help the poor make the transition to a
   low-carbon lifestyle. Fourth, forge a strong global treaty to cut
   emissions and put it into effect by 2010, two years earlier than
   currently envisaged. Fifth, stop building new coal-fired power plants,
   unless they can capture and sequester the carbon they emit.

   With the Democrats in control of Congress, environmentalists are more
   optimistic than they were last year that it might enact curbs on
   greenhouse gases. About a dozen bills are currently being considered.
   But nothing as radical as Mr Gore's proposals is likely to pass.

   Few in Congress deny that the earth is getting warmer or that man is
   at least partly to blame. But few can agree what to do about it,
   either. One obstacle is cost. Though Mr Gore denies it, freezing CO2
   emissions straight away would be ferociously expensive. That worries
   both parties. One Republican congressman fretted that Mr Gore's plan
   would mean no new industry, no new cars and no new people in America.
   John Dingell, a Democrat from the Detroit suburbs, lamented the rows
   of empty houses he sees in the city since the American car industry
   fell on hard times.

   Another obstacle is inertia. If Congress were creating a tax code from
   scratch, it might well discourage pollution rather than work, as Mr
   Gore demands. But since it is not starting from scratch, such a big
   change will hurt a lot of people now in pursuit of benefits a
   generation hence.

   A third obstacle is that many in Congress are reluctant to make big
   sacrifices if China and India do not also sign up to them, which
   neither wants to. Mr Gore says it is up to America to show leadership.

   The Democrats have two options. They can push now for the toughest
   carbon-curbing law that will survive a filibuster in the Senate and a
   possible veto by President George Bush. Or they can wait two years and
   hope to pass something tougher in 2009, with someone greener in the
   White House. Mr Gore says there is no time to waste, but Congress may
   waste it anyway.

   Meanwhile, Mr Gore appears to be enjoying the limelight. He says he
   will not seek the presidency again, but many Democrats wish he would.
   Since he quit politics for advocacy, he has sounded more passionate
   and less calculating than Hillary Clinton, the front-runner for the
   Democratic nomination. But still, only 7% of Americans think the
   environment or global warming should be the government's priority.

