
                                                                       AP

                                     AP

   Illegal immigration is one of the hottest issues of the election
   season 


   NO SUBJECT has discombobulated this year's presidential debates as
   much as immigration. Hillary Clinton's recent fall from grace dates
   from her refusal to give a straight answer to a question about whether
   she supports allowing illegal immigrants to have driving licences. On
   the Republican side, some of the testiest exchanges of the political
   season have been between Mitt Romney and Rudy Giuliani over illegal
   immigrants.

   Mr Romney accuses Mr Giuliani of running a "sanctuary city" when he
   was mayor of New York. Mr Giuliani accuses Mr Romney of living in a
   "sanctuary mansion" because the firm that he employs to do his
   gardening employs illegals (Mr Romney retorted that he could not be
   expected to verify the immigration status of everyone with a "funny
   accent" and later sacked the company). All very childish. But all very
   telling too.

   The rise of illegal immigration as an election issue is one of the
   most remarkable changes in American politics in recent decades. George
   Bush and Al Gore hardly discussed the subject--they both agreed that
   America needed to do a better job of providing illegal immigrants with
   a path to citizenship. The same was true of Mr Bush and John Kerry.

   The subject has nevertheless become a red-hot issue, dangerous to
   anyone who touches it. There are two obvious reasons for this. One is
   numbers: there are now an estimated 12m illegal immigrants living in
   the United States, and at least another half-million enter the country
   each year. America's growing Hispanic population is also spreading
   across the country--even reaching the all-important early-voting
   states of Iowa, New Hampshire and South Carolina. The other reason is
   the rise of anxiety about globalisation. A recent Pew Research Centre
   report shows that America has seen the biggest rise in worries about
   trade of any rich country since 2002. This is producing a populist
   backlash against both immigration and "broken borders".

   Twist and shout

   The mainstream Republican candidates are all on record as supporting
   fair-minded "comprehensive" immigration reform. John McCain sponsored
   a reform bill together with his Democratic colleague, Ted Kennedy. Mr
   Romney mocked the idea that you could deport 12m people. As mayor of
   New York, Mr Giuliani denounced federal immigration laws as harsh and
   unfair. As governor of Arkansas, Mike Huckabee supported allowing the
   children of illegal immigrants to claim cheap in-state tuition. As a
   senator for Tennessee, Fred Thompson supported an increase in the
   number of visas available for agricultural workers.

   The most outspoken "restrictionist" on the platform is Tom Tancredo,
   an obscure Republican congressman from Colorado. Mr Tancredo has made
   immigration reform--which to him means sending the 12m back home--the
   centrepiece of his campaign. He has produced advertisements linking
   illegal immigrants to terrorism and gang violence.

   Flaky stuff. But Mr Tancredo speaks for a sizeable portion of the
   Republican base. He helped to replace Mr McCain's immigration-reform
   bill with a harsher measure that authorised the building of a 700-mile
   (1,100km) fence along the Mexican border. And he--or at least
   Tancredoism--is having a remarkable influence on the Republican
   debate.

   The most shameless flip-flopper on immigration is Mr Romney. He now
   echoes Mr Tancredo's talk of "amnesty" and criticises his
   rivals--particularly Messrs Giuliani and Huckabee--for being soft on
   immigration. But others have followed in his direction. Mr Giuliani
   emphasises border security. Mr Huckabee has produced a "secure America
   plan". Mr Thompson threatens to "punish employers" who hire illegals.
   Even Mr McCain has hardened his line on immigration, though he
   continues to warn his party against demonising immigrants. Mr Tancredo
   now accuses his rivals of trying to "out-Tancredo Tancredo".

   This represents a repudiation of Mr Bush's strategy of welcoming
   Latinos into the Republican tent by supporting immigration reform. It
   also carries risks for the Republicans in the 2008 election--and
   indeed in future elections. Latinos are the fastest growing electoral
   block in the country. The Republicans could end up losing five
   Latino-rich states that Mr Bush won in 2004: Florida, Arizona, New
   Mexico, Nevada and Colorado.

   The Democratic candidates have been much more consistent in their
   support for comprehensive immigration reform. Every senator on the
   platform supported Mr McCain's legislation, for example. But they are
   also aware that the subject is a bear trap. Only two mainstream
   candidates, Mr Obama and Bill Richardson, have come out in favour of
   allowing illegal immigrants to obtain driving licences (Mrs Clinton
   resolved her internal debate by deciding against the idea). The
   mainstream candidates have been careful to avoid calling illegals
   "undocumented workers", the formulation favoured by pro-immigrant
   pressure groups in their party.

   They are right to be nervous. Most Americans are ambivalent about
   illegal immigration--proud of America's history as an
   immigrant-friendly country but hostile to anything that sanctions
   breaking the law and worried about the economic impact of immigration.
   The latest [4]Economist/YouGov poll (see chart) reveals a striking
   degree of concern about the threat that immigration poses both to
   "traditional American values" and economic well-being. Illegal
   immigrants also place huge burdens on America's hospitals, schools and
   prisons (there are, for instance, around 20,000 of them in
   California's jails).

   Worries about globalisation are strong among two of the Democratic
   Party's core constituencies--blue-collar workers and blacks. Some
   working-class Americans must compete for jobs with people who are in
   the country illegally. In California, English-speakers are fleeing
   urban schools where more than 70% of the children are Hispanics,
   forking out for private schools or homes in the suburbs.

   The driving-licence question is particularly dangerous for Democrats.
   Only 22% of the voters in a recent Los Angeles Times/Bloomberg poll
   supported allowing illegal immigrants to get licences. Eliot Spitzer,
   the governor of New York, saw his popularity collapse when he endorsed
   the idea. He has now retreated.

   This adds up to a big potential difficulty for Mr Obama in the
   election. James Carville, one of the most astute Democratic
   operatives, gives warning that "the centrality of illegal immigration
   to the current discontent about the direction of the country may be
   taking us back again to a `welfare moment'"--referring to Bill
   Clinton's decision to break with his party's base in supporting
   welfare reform.

   The problem of illegal immigration will continue to haunt the
   presidential race. Rightly so: no country should have 12m people
   living illegally within its borders. But awkwardly so from the
   perspective of the candidates: the issue pulls Americans in all sorts
   of contradictory directions. No wonder most politicians keep trying to
   duck the question--and no wonder the voters will not let them.

