
   What a new park reveals about attitudes to public space

   JUST east of downtown Irvine, in southern California, a bucolic
   landscape is under construction. Little by little, a former military
   airport is being dismantled, to be replaced by grass, trees and a
   canyon 70 feet (21 metres) deep. When it is finished, Orange county's
   Great Park will cover 1,350 acres (550 hectares), more than
   one-and-a-half times as much as Central Park in New York. The biggest
   landscaped municipal park to be built in more than a century, it
   reveals much about how American attitudes to open space have changed.

   Urban parks are back in fashion. In Denver, an 80-acre park opened in
   September on the site of another disused airport. New York plans to
   build a huge park on top of the Fresh Kills landfill in Staten Island.
   Innumerable town squares and pocket parks have been created or
   beautified, even in gritty places like Detroit. City planners, who
   once viewed parks as financial drains and nests of crime, now see them
   as magnets for tourists and creative types.

   The great parks that were built in the second half of the 19th century
   were intended to counteract the ill effects of city living, and so are
   the new ones. But the perceived ills have changed. Frederick Olmsted,
   who designed Central Park and many others, wanted to provide people
   with a respite from their tough, dirty jobs. Ken Smith, the Great
   Park's architect, reckons the residents of Orange county are quite
   idle enough. What they need is exercise: hence the park's proposed 21
   football fields and 12 baseball fields, together with some
   exhausting-looking walks.

   Another difference is that parks are now expected to function like
   natural ecosystems as well as looking like them. The Great Park will
   use recycled water in its lake (older parks often used mains water).
   The runways will be pulverised and turned into roads and a memorial.
   In a nod to the local-food movement, the park will include land for
   farming and composting. Even the car park will be situated in an
   orange grove.

   Most striking of all is the new parks' deference to history. America's
   great 19th-century landscape architects saw the land as a blank slate.
   An entire village was razed to build Central Park. By contrast,
   Denver's park preserves a control tower, and the Great Park will
   convert a hangar into a museum and retain the outline of a runway. A
   river diverted underground by the marines will be restored to its
   former course. The preservation lobby is stronger these days. And
   besides, says Yehudi Gaffen, a partner in the Great Park project,
   "Southern California has so little history that we should try to keep
   some of it."

