
                                                                  Reuters

                                  Reuters

   After Mitt Romney's victory, no one has the slightest idea who will
   win the Republican presidential nomination 


   "I'VE got Michigan in my DNA. I've got it in my heart and I've got
   cars in my bloodstream." That was Mitt Romney before he won the
   Republican primary in Michigan this week, thumping John McCain by 39%
   to 30% and leaving Mike Huckabee flat in the snow with 16%. Presumably
   he now likes the place even more.

   His rivals instantly discounted his victory. Mr Romney grew up in
   Michigan. His father, George Romney, was a popular governor in the
   1960s. The day before the primary, Mr Romney showed a friendly crowd
   at a country club some souvenirs of his dad's unsuccessful bid for the
   White House. There was a campaign comb (cue for a quip about the
   family hair), some campaign pins and a slogan: "Set our country
   straight: Romney in 68". The crowd loved it. But voters in South
   Carolina will be harder to sway.

   That said, Mr Romney ran a smarter campaign in Michigan than in Iowa
   and New Hampshire, where he aimed lots of negative ads at Mr Huckabee
   and Mr McCain but lost. In Michigan, his message was more upbeat. He
   talked a lot about the economy, and sold himself as the candidate best
   qualified to fix it. Mr McCain, who won Michigan in 2000, helped him
   by sounding gloomier. He said, probably correctly, that some of the
   jobs Michigan has lost will never come back.

   Exit polls showed that voters cared more about the economy than
   anything else. Small wonder: Michigan has stalled. Its car firms are
   ailing; its people are leaving. Unemployment, at 7.4%, is the highest
   in America. Voters judged Mr Romney most capable of easing their pain.
   A successful venture capitalist before he was governor of
   Massachusetts, he palpably knows more about money than his rivals.

   The candidates all pandered to Michigan's biggest special interest. At
   the Detroit motor show they all followed the same routine: the nod (as
   a car-company executive described the latest model), the `ah' (of
   admiration) and the fiddle (with various gadgets in the car).
   Naturally, they shunned foreign vehicles like a handshake with Osama
   bin Laden.

   Mr McCain pandered the least. On the stump, he banged on about climate
   change. (His home state of Arizona is so dry, he said, the trees chase
   the dogs.) Mr Huckabee pandered the most empathetically, staring into
   insecure workers' eyes and announcing that "there's a world of hurt
   out there in America." Mr Romney pandered with the most facts at his
   fingertips, helped by the fact that his dad was a car-firm boss before
   he was a politician.

   In his first 100 days in office, Mr Romney said he would bring
   together car firms, unions and government and make a plan to revive
   the industry. He would reduce taxes, trim regulations, make health
   insurance (a huge chunk of the cost of an American car) cheaper and
   curb frivolous lawsuits. He would also slow the tightening of
   fuel-economy standards. "Take off those burdens and let's show them
   how fast a Mustang will actually go," he said.

   Mr Romney has come first or second in all the votes so far. His people
   tout him as the most acceptable candidate to the broadest range of
   Republicans. Fiscal conservatives like him. Evangelicals may not love
   him as they do Mr Huckabee, a Baptist preacher, but they concur with
   his current positions on abortion and gay marriage. He lacks Mr
   McCain's national-security credentials, but says he will keep the
   armed forces strong. Add brains and good looks, and you have a
   plausible nominee, though his Mormonism and his policy shifts are
   problems for many.

   Mr Romney's detractors offer several rebuttals. John McCain's fans
   note that in head-to-head polls against Hillary Clinton and Barack
   Obama, their man is the only Republican who wins. But a lot could
   change before November, and the qualities that attract independent
   voters to Mr McCain, such as his liberal views on immigration, repel
   many Republicans.

   Mr Huckabee's fans reckon that Mr Romney will lose because his money
   can't buy him charisma. And it is indeed hard to imagine him strumming
   a guitar, cracking jokes about the Rolling Stones or getting in a
   snowball fight outside a polling booth, as Mr Huckabee did in
   Michigan.

   Mr Romney did well in nearly every Republican group in Michigan--he
   even beat Mr Huckabee among evangelicals. But he has yet to prove
   himself on unfamiliar terrain. And he cannot win nationally unless he
   attracts more support from less prosperous people. Shortly before he
   addressed that friendly country club, someone announced that three
   cars were parked inappropriately outside: a silver Mercedes, a red
   Jaguar and a gold one.

   Three lessons can be drawn from Michigan. One is that the race for the
   Republican nomination is even more open than before. Three frenzied
   contests have thrown up three winners. (Mr Romney also won Wyoming, a
   race his rivals skipped.) South Carolina on January 19th will be a
   bare-knuckle scrap. Rudy Giuliani, a former mayor of New York, will
   join the mêlée on January 29th in Florida. No one has the slightest
   idea who will win.

   The second lesson is that if America tips into recession, the sirens
   of populism will warble louder. A conventional economic conservative
   won this week, but only by echoing some populist refrains. Both Mr
   Romney and Mr McCain are free-traders, but both suggest on the stump
   that some types of trade are unfair. And nearly all candidates in both
   parties hint that switching to alternative fuels will cut off funds
   for Islamic terrorism, by reducing the price of oil. This is bunk.
   Only an imperceptible portion of petrodollars bankroll terrorism,
   which is anyway quite cheap. Al-Qaeda coped just fine when oil was $10
   a barrel.

   The third lesson is that although political junkies have been obsessed
   with the campaign for more than a year, many Americans have barely
   begun to think about it. Turnout in Michigan was low. Standing behind
   floor-to-ceiling bulletproof glass, the manager of a liquor store in
   downtown Detroit said he did not realise there was an election going
   on. "You're from a newspaper?" he asked. "You want to sell it in my
   store?"

