
   Esalen, birthplace of the New Age, is a victim of its own success

                                                             Getty Images

                                Getty Images

   THE notion that America spends its leisure time praying at evangelical
   megachurches is widespread; but the United States is a diverse
   country, and many of its people get their spiritual nourishment
   elsewhere. Some of them are in yoga studios, wearing prAna-branded
   stretch pants and chanting "Om". Others are in spas and retreats,
   getting exotic massages; queuing at the Ayurvedic and Chinese-medicine
   counter at, say, Elephant Pharmacy in Berkeley; in psychotherapy
   sessions, to improve themselves or their marriages. If asked about
   their faith, many would answer that they are "spiritual, but not
   religious".

   That may sound daft to both theists and atheists; but it comes from a
   deeply American cultural tradition--one that has, if one can call it
   that, its own Mecca or Vatican. This is a place called Esalen. It is
   in California, unsurprisingly, and consists of 120 acres of
   spectacular gardens on a dramatic cliff on the Big Sur coastline just
   south of the Monterey peninsula. Its altar or central shrine, as it
   were, is a bath built into the cliff, where hot and healing water
   bubbles out of a geothermal spring into baths that offer the world's
   best in-tub views. Here the worshippers give and get massages au
   naturel, at any hour of the day or night.

   The Esalen Institute calls itself "an alternative educational centre
   devoted to the exploration of the human potential". Depending on the
   observer, it is also a lot of other things. For about 10,000 people a
   year--about a quarter of them foreign, especially German and Swiss--it
   is a place not only to bathe naked but also to take seminars with
   titles such as "Humour and Other Martial Arts", "Science and
   Spirituality" and "Healing the Pelvic Floor".

   For invited experts only, Esalen is also a "centre for theory and
   research" that explores topics such as the "survival of bodily death".
   As such, it is a "meeting place and platform for disseminating ideas",
   as Michael Murphy, Esalen's 77-year-old co-founder and chairman, puts
   it.

   For many others in America and around the world, Esalen stands more
   vaguely for that metaphorical point where "East meets West" and is
   transformed into something uniquely and mystically American or New
   Agey. And for a great many others yet, Esalen is simply that notorious
   bagno-bordello where people had sex and got high throughout the 1960s
   and 1970s before coming home talking psychobabble and dangling
   crystals. In short, Esalen is in every way, even geologically,
   California at its most extreme. It is its caricature, as well as its
   noblest expression.

   Esalen is named after the Esselen, a now-extinct Indian tribe that
   used the place as their burial ground. In 1910 the Murphy family
   bought the land from homesteaders, but it was almost impossible to
   reach until work crews blasted a highway past it in the 1930s. It soon
   drew risqué rebels of every sort. John Steinbeck and Aldous Huxley
   spent time there. Henry Miller, whose "Tropic of Cancer" was banned
   for obscenity, did his laundry and much else at the Esalen springs.

   In the 1950s, the Beat poets came from San Francisco and brought women
   and books about Tantra. Mingling easily were scholars such as Alan
   Watts, a bon vivant and expert on Taoism and Zen Buddhism. Then came
   anarchists, hippies and drugs. Mr Murphy and his co-founder, Richard
   Price, came down in the early 1960s and created the institute. Their
   different but complementary personalities would soon turn the place
   into a phenomenon.

   Mr Murphy was an Irish-American Episcopalian altar boy who had, in
   1950, stumbled into the wrong classroom at Stanford University. A
   German professor, Frederic Spiegelberg, was lecturing on eastern
   religions. "Wake up! The Brahman is the Atman," Mr Spiegelberg was
   shouting at the top of his lungs, and Mr Murphy ceased being an altar
   boy at that instant.

   Mr Price, who studied psychology at Stanford, and also found himself
   in courses by Mr Spiegelberg and Mr Watts, had had psychological
   problems. His father forced him into a mental institution, where--this
   being the 1950s--he received insulin injections and electric shocks
   that damaged his health for ever. The experience traumatised him. He
   eventually broke with his family and escaped to San Francisco, where
   he met Mr Murphy in a meditation workshop in 1960.

                                                          Eslan Institute

                              Eslan Institute

             Richard Price and Michael Murphy; getting in touch

   Together they made Esalen into their ideal human dwelling and thus, in
   stages, created the Californian way of life as the world understands
   it. First, both admired Mr Spiegelberg, and in particular his 1948
   book "The Religion of No Religion". Messrs Murphy and Price would
   translate that into "no one captures the flag", a phrase heard at
   Esalen to this day which means that every religion, fad and idea has
   equal access as long as it does not try to exclude or dominate the
   others. In practice, this ruled out the Abrahamic religions, but
   welcomed Yogic and Vedic philosophy, Zen Buddhism and Taoism, which
   are non-theistic and easy-going about orthodoxy.

                                                          Eslan Institute

                              Eslan Institute

    A tub with a view; Fritz Perls and friend; George Harrison and Ravi
                                  Shankar

   But Messrs Murphy and Price didn't want to import the Asian traditions
   wholesale. Mr Murphy had hated the conservative and hierarchical
   society that he saw in India, which Mr Price compared to his
   totalitarian experience in the mental asylum. They wanted to mix
   Eastern spirituality with Western individualism, democracy, science,
   openness, and optimism. In particular, they liked Huxley's idea about
   "human potentialities", and adopted the term.

   From the outset, Esalen's mission was therefore high-minded. Mr Murphy
   says that his hope was always to unite the two separate historical
   enlightenments, "the European one, with Voltaire, which the Germans
   call Aufklärung" and "the Asian one, around Samadhi, which the Germans
   call Erleuchtung." Out of the synthesis would come a uniquely American
   enlightenment, in the tradition of Emerson and Thoreau, a cheerful
   union of intellect and spirit, body and soul.

   This--specifically the bit about the body--soon presented a
   predictably Californian problem. The fancy Asian way of putting the
   Esalen vision was the word Tantra, a strand in Eastern philosophy that
   considers the physical world not an illusion to be overcome but a
   vehicle to reach the divine. Mr Murphy, for instance, has always seen
   golf as a form of meditation, a notion that in 1972 he turned into a
   bestselling book, "Golf in the Kingdom". "My passion was for
   self-cultivation that involves discipline" as opposed to "letting it
   all hang out," he says. "Curiously, what happens around the world with
   Tantra also happened at Esalen."

   As a long-time friend of Esalen, who participated at the time,
   recalls, "that Tantric stuff in the books was all about people fucking
   their brains out in the baths." Often with drugs to add oomph. Mr
   Murphy was disgusted. He decided to clean the place up. One night in
   1961, thereafter known as "the Night of the Dobermans", Messrs Murphy
   and Price, with a few others, including the folk singer Joan Baez, who
   was living in one of the cabins, walked three Doberman pinschers down
   the dirt path to the baths, where a mob of San Francisco gays was
   having an orgy. The orgiasts scurried off hastily.

                                                       Time Life Pictures

                             Time Life Pictures

                          Bongo drums and massage

   That didn't end the tension, however. Yes, the grounds were now safe
   again for meditating yogis, shamans and such. But the cerebral and
   ascetic, or "Apollonian", aspect of the activities always had
   competition from the sensual and indulgent, or "Dionysian", side. For
   a time, Esalen even had its own venereal-disease clinic.

   The drugs were also a problem. Mr Murphy was informed that
   California's state government had placed agents on the grounds. He
   went to the bureaucracy and discovered that he was an "innkeeper" and
   thus liable. He put up a No Drugs sign, and kicked out any known
   dealers. Still, "we knew that at half of the seminars everybody was
   stoned," he says. A course on "drug-induced mysticism" remained one of
   the most popular offerings. There were casualties, including several
   suicides that involved drugs.

   This tension between what Jeffrey Kripal, the author of "Esalen:
   America and the Religion of No Religion", calls the "right hand" and
   the "left hand" of Esalen Tantra remains to this day. On the right, or
   intellectual and disciplined, hand, all forms of mysticism and
   spirituality are erotic, but abstractly so. Taoism, for instance, is
   based on the attraction of yin and yang, female and male, electron and
   positron. On the left, or sensual, hand, since the patrons are naked
   so much of the time anyway, it was and is often hard not to get
   literal. The famous Esalen massages used to be given in the nude
   (nowadays, only the receiver is nude). One old-timer, now respectably
   dressed, fondly recollects a variation that involved six or more
   masseuses "healing" one person simultaneously.

   The parade of Greats

   What kept Esalen highbrow, however, was a steady influx of
   intellectual heavyweights, many of them Jewish European émigrés.
   Almost any cutting-edge trend in psychology, body work and alternative
   medicine during the 1960s and 1970s passed through Esalen, where, as
   Mr Murphy puts it, it was "filtered, because a lot of this stuff veers
   off into quackery".

   In psychology, Abraham Maslow, already well-known, dropped by in the
   1960s and ended up staying. He tried to extend the human-potential
   concept by teaching ways to "self-actualise". Next came Fritz Perls, a
   psychotherapist who came close to capturing the flag with his "Gestalt
   therapy". The Esalen joke was that this was "Jewish Buddhism" or "Zen
   Judaism". The theory was that, whereas Freud had focused on a
   patient's past and his unconscious perception of it, Gestalt therapy
   focused on the here and now and the person's conscious perception of
   it. That bundle of sensory inputs and emotional interpretations makes
   up a narrative "construct", or Gestalt in German.

   In his sessions, Mr Perls tried to free his students from the baggage
   of their past, often with brutal confrontations in front of the group.
   Other psychologists, such as William Schutz, soon extended this to
   "open-encounter" groups, where students played roles and told each
   other blunt and relentless truths. One example was called the
   "Pandora's Box" and involved the women "working through" fear of their
   genitals by exposing their vaginas, having the group look up them and
   then "process" their reactions together. Sometimes, these sessions led
   to emotional catharsis; sometimes to bitterness and divorce.

   Esalen's other big export was body work, which at Esalen blurred the
   boundaries between medicine and spirituality. Today, it is possible to
   get "rolfed" at spas all over the world. This method was refined at
   Esalen, when Ida Rolf came there and taught her ideas about digging
   elbows and knuckles deep into a person's connective tissues, not only
   to correct skeletal alignment but also to liberate pent-up emotions.
   Once, as she worked on Mr Perls, he passed out completely for minutes,
   and Ms Rolf feared that she might have rolfed herself a corpse. But
   her method caught on, and she started her own institute in 1971.

   Esalen was a launching pad for Moshe Feldenkrais, now famous for his
   "Feldenkrais Method". He was a nuclear physicist who had suffered a
   football injury that threatened to paralyse him. He healed himself
   through bodily movements that sprang from his knowledge of judo and
   other martial arts. The motion of the limbs seemed to forge new
   connections in the brain, as though the body taught the brain.

   Next came Charlotte Selver, who taught a form of "sensory awareness"
   that today forms the basis of the "Esalen massage", a contemplative
   style with long strokes that is known in France as "massage
   Californien". Another teacher, Don Hanlon Johnson, would extend this
   to a general approach called "somatics", which includes any number of
   ways to access the mind through the body.

   Esalen also played a crucial role in bringing Eastern, or "holistic",
   medicine to the American mainstream: staff members helped to draft the
   first industry regulations. In the field of mythology, Joseph Campbell
   lectured at Esalen for years before he became famous. Fritjof Capra, a
   particle physicist who saw parallels between quantum physics and
   Eastern philosophy, and wrote about these in "The Tao of Physics",
   spent time at Esalen. And, in the 1980s, Esalen gave East-meets-West a
   political dimension when it pioneered "citizen diplomacy" with the
   Soviet Union, culminating in its sponsoring of Boris Yeltsin's private
   trip to America in 1989.

   That empty feeling

   But in the 1970s and 1980s, Esalen also had unpleasant encounters with
   the real. Mr Murphy had moved to San Francisco, and Mr Price was
   running the place, and not exactly along corporate lines. He used Lao
   Tzu's Tao Te Ching (think "managing emptiness") as his governance
   guide, and was advised by a council called "Jenny and the Nine", whose
   most noteworthy feature was that they did not exist. Esalen was
   perennially on the verge of bankruptcy. In 1985 Mr Price died, in true
   Esalen style. He hiked up the mountain to the source of the hot
   springs, and was apparently meditating when a boulder fell on him.

   By then the trends that Esalen had spawned--called New Age, probably
   the most hated term at Esalen--were becoming mainstream and banal.
   Culturally, the entire West Coast now resembled Esalen, and colonies
   were springing up from Koh Samui to Kitzbühel. Esalen appointed a
   series of more business-minded managers who restored its finances. But
   by the 1990s, the place felt intellectually and erotically stale, just
   another spa where ageing hippies got pampered. Was it, as some unkind
   graffiti on the welcome sign read, just "jive shit for rich white
   folk"?

   In 1998 El Niño almost blew the baths off the cliff. There was talk of
   shutting the place down. Instead, the baths were rebuilt, and Mr
   Murphy started the "centre for theory and research", his "R&D arm", as
   he calls it, to spawn new ideas. The spawning, so far, seems ho-hum.
   There is talk about eco-psychology. And Esalen hopes to extend a new
   round of East-West citizen diplomacy to Islam. Most tellingly, though,
   Esalen now produces papers with titles such as "Integral Business
   Planning Document". PowerPoint presentations cannot be far off.

   Esalen's old-timers debate the way forward. Jerome Gary first came in
   1969, when he was 22 and a hippie, and had met a bellydancer who took
   him to the baths. Now 60, he plans to make a documentary about
   Esalen--he has already made films about other Californian phenomena,
   such as "Pumping Iron" in 1977, which featured a young body-builder
   named Arnold Schwarzenegger. Esalen's problem is that "yesterday's
   iconoclast is today's cliché," says Mr Gary. On the other hand, "we're
   in a culture once again where we are experiencing clashing
   fundamentalisms" and Esalen could help as the counterpoint.

   In a sense, Esalen is a victim of its own success. The culture it
   created is now mainstream. In another sense, it is just a
   manifestation of California as its vibrant, healthy self. Young people
   looking for a place to express themselves, to flaunt and paint their
   bodies and try anything that promises to be zany and cool still have a
   place to go--only now it is called Burning Man, a festival in the
   Nevada desert. Those looking for intellectual radicalism, indeed human
   potential, go to the annual TED conference up the road in Monterey.

   Whether at Esalen or not, Californians are still willing to try
   anything new--to do it until it hurts and to become caricatures in the
   process--in order to explore how far we can go as human beings. The
   consequences may sometimes be laughable, but somebody has to do it.

