
   Silent but deadly
   "I'm sorry, I don't talk to the press and that applies to you,
   unfortunately."

   Chelsea Clinton refuses to be interviewed by any journalists, even a
   nine-year-old reporter for Scholastic News. Associated Press, December
   31st 

   Having your cake and eating it
   "I pulled the ad. I do not want it to be run at all."

   Mike Huckabee, deciding not to run a negative ad against Mitt Romney.
   He then showed it to the media, and it has since appeared on news
   reports and the internet.

   [3]Washingtonpost.com, December 31st 

   Hedging your bets
   "I think I'm going to win. I'm not going to forecast that necessarily.
   But I think I'm going to win, and that would be enormously powerful
   for my campaign."

   Mitt Romney on his chances in Iowa. [4]CNN.com, December 31st 

   All I want
   "Take me on a vacation."

   Cindy McCain suggesting a New Year's resolution for her husband.
   CNN.com, December 31st 

   Going postal
   "John doesn't have a record in the Senate. John's only passed four
   bills. They're all about post offices. I mean, literally."

   Joe Biden on John Edwards's senatorial career. Washingtonpost.com,
   December 31st 

   Officially unofficial
   "He will not have a formal official role. But just as presidents rely
   on wives, husbands, fathers, friends of long years, he will be my
   close confidant and adviser, as I was with him."

   Hillary Clinton on her husband's possible future role. ABC News,
   December 30th 

   Geography 101
   "In light of what is happening in Pakistan it ought to give us pause
   as to why are so many illegals coming across these borders."

   Mike Huckabee on immigration. Associated Press, December 28th 

   Delicate flower
   "It was a severe headache, yeah, and everything has turned out fine.
   All the tests turned out 100%. As you can see, I'm very healthy."

   Rudy Giuliani was hospitalised in St Louis. Los Angeles Times,
   December 23rd 

   Animal lover
   "Well...these three birds all said they would not vote for me on
   caucus day. You see what happened?"

   Mike Huckabee went pheasant hunting in Iowa, shooting three birds.
   Washingtonpost.com, December 26th

