
   Attention shifts to two states that are unused to it

   THE West usually comes late to the primary season, by which point the
   excitement is over. This year it is crashing the party. Of the
   region's 11 states, seven will select their Republican and Democratic
   candidates by February 5th. This week prospective nominees turned
   their attention to two states that are unaccustomed to it. One is
   Nevada, which will hold caucuses on January 19th. The other is
   California, the greatest prize in the race. Although polling booths in
   California do not open until February 5th, half of the votes there are
   expected to be sent in early by post. The first ballots landed on
   doormats this week.

   In 2004 fewer than 10,000 people turned up to the Democratic caucuses
   in Nevada. The American media have largely overlooked the state, as
   have the Republicans. They are more focused on South Carolina, which
   will pick a Republican candidate on the same day. But the Democrats
   see Nevada as a gateway to the West and a crucial source of momentum.
   Barack Obama dropped two references to the state into his concession
   speech in New Hampshire.

   Until recently Nevada seemed to be in the bag for Hillary Clinton, who
   led in polls and had picked up endorsements from prominent Democrats.
   But this week Nevada's two most powerful unions threw their weight
   behind Mr Obama. The Culinary Workers Union has some 60,000 members,
   most of whom work in casinos, where, handily, some of the caucuses
   will be held. The Service Employees International Union is smaller but
   can draw organisers from neighbouring California. Since turnout is
   expected to be fairly low, the outcome of the caucuses is likely to
   turn on a contest between two get-out-the-vote operations--the unions'
   versus the Democratic establishment's.

   In Iowa and New Hampshire Mr Obama did especially well among
   independent voters, well-off urbanites and the young. The first group
   is much prized game in the West. Democratic officials in California
   and Nevada have made it easy for independents to vote in their
   contests. The Republicans have not, so independents are forced into
   the Democratic race.

   Mr Obama will need their support, because he faces a big disadvantage.
   California and Nevada are heavily Hispanic--in California there are as
   many Latinos aged 18 to 29 as whites and blacks put together. Not all
   can vote, and relatively few of those who can, will. But those who do
   are likely to support Mrs Clinton. California's leading Latino
   politicians have rallied to her, and polls put her lead among Hispanic
   voters somewhere between strong and overwhelming. Bill Richardson
   dropped out of the race on January 9th, so now there is no actual
   Hispanic to vote for.

   Some of this has to do with the fact that many Latinos are
   working-class and thus attracted to Mrs Clinton's talk of economic
   problem-solving. But Mr Obama's race matters too. California's Latinos
   are frequently pitted against blacks in the zero-sum game of urban
   politics, which generates broader resentments.

   Postal voters are Mrs Clinton's other strength. They are older than
   average, and she has done well among the old so far. They are
   enthusiastic: more than three-quarters returned their ballots in the
   2006 mid-term elections. Like Rudy Giuliani, the Republican candidate
   with the strongest California operation, she will target them
   relentlessly. Both hope to win the big race before it has begun.

