


   The Republican Party is in a mess. The answer is surprisingly simple

   BACK in July 2007, John Heilemann, a writer for New York magazine and
   an alumnus of this newspaper, argued that it was possible to imagine
   John McCain winning the Republican nomination--but only if you had
   been fortified by "half a bottle of Maker's Mark, followed by a
   nitrous-oxide chaser". Mr McCain is now back. But a bigger question
   remains. Do you need to partake of Mr Heilemann's chemical cocktail to
   believe that the Republican nomination is worth having?

   The Republicans look like dead men walking. Almost two-thirds of
   Americans regard the Iraq war as a mistake. A similar proportion think
   that the country is on the wrong track. Americans regard the Democrats
   as more competent than Republicans by a margin of five to three and
   more ethical by a margin of two to one. They prefer Democratic
   policies on everything from health care to taxes.

   These figures have come to life in Iowa and New Hampshire. Twice as
   many Democrats turned out to caucus in Iowa as Republicans. The
   Democrats are fired up with Bush-hatred and ready to take the White
   House. The Republicans are despondent and defensive. "I'd rather vote
   for a dead dog than a Democrat", one New Hampshirite told this
   columnist. "But the way things are going it might have to be the dead
   dog."

   The party has flailed around for a champion without success. Rudy
   Giuliani led the national polls for months only to implode. Fred
   Thompson sped to the front for a while only to fall asleep at the
   wheel. The party is divided into warring factions. Mitt Romney and
   Mike Huckabee have as much in common as their respective alma
   maters--Harvard Business School and Ouachita Baptist University. The
   party is also in danger of going off the deep end. Mr Huckabee denies
   that man is descended from the apes. Everyone except Mr McCain seems
   to think that it's a good plan to send 12m illegal immigrants back
   home.

   The party's travails are producing a fierce argument on the right. Are
   the Republicans' problems just part of the normal political cycle? Or
   do they portend the end of an era? The pragmatists argue that the
   problems are just a matter of competence and happenstance. The war in
   Iraq was badly managed until Bob Gates and General David Petraeus took
   over. The White House's response to Hurricane Katrina was dismal. The
   Republican majority in Congress fell victim to the normal foibles of
   greed and lust. Voters always grow tired of incumbents.

   The fundamentalists think that there is something much deeper going
   on. Ed Rollins, a former Reagan aide who is now Mr Huckabee's campaign
   chairman, argues that the machine that Ronald Reagan built is now
   finished. The coalition of social conservatives, defence conservatives
   and anti-tax conservatives "doesn't mean a whole lot to people
   anymore". Mr Huckabee is openly critical of George Bush's foreign
   policy.

   The truth is more nuanced. There is more than happenstance at work,
   but less than the break-up of the Republican coalition. Mr Bush's
   people pursued a self-defeating political strategy. They fired up the
   Republican base, ignoring the centre and rewarding their loyalists
   with government largesse. But Mr Bush's serial incompetence destroyed
   his narrow majority. And his addiction to government spending
   alienated fiscal conservatives.

   Mr Bush's Republicans also made serious policy errors. They stuck
   their head in the sand over global warming. They ignored rising
   anxiety about stagnating middle-class incomes. They turned the war on
   terrorism into a defining issue and then messed it up. Mr Reagan had a
   lasting influence not just because he forged a coalition but also
   because he was right on the biggest issues of his time--the importance
   of shrinking government and facing down communism. The Republicans are
   now in danger of being either wrong or half wrong on two of the
   defining issues of our time--global warming and radical Islam.

   This suggests that the Republicans need to engage in some vigorous
   rethinking, and fast. But it does not add up to a case for taking a
   jack-hammer to the Reagan coalition. The coalition has served the
   Republicans handsomely in the past--they will have held the White
   House for 20 of the past 28 years and controlled the House for 12
   years from 1995. Jackhammering the coalition would almost certainly be
   a disaster. Do the Republicans really want to abandon a chunk of their
   core voters when they are already behind in the polls? And do they
   want to engage in a civil war in the middle of a tight election?

   The value of values

   Business conservatives can never win a majority without the support of
   "values voters" (there just are not enough people around who look like
   Mr Romney). "Values voters" can never produce a viable governing
   coalition without the help of the business elite. The Republicans have
   seen revolts against their ruling coalition before--remember Pat
   Buchanan's pitchfork rebellion against George Bush senior--and they
   have always succeeded in putting it back together again. They need to
   do the same now. Enough Republicans believe enough of the Reagan
   mantra--less government, traditional values and strong defence--to
   make it a workable philosophy.

   The doomsters draw the wrong lesson from the Bush years. The lesson of
   the Bush presidency is not that the Republican coalition is exhausted
   but that it has been badly managed. Mr Bush has failed to keep the
   coalition in balance--he tilted too far towards his party's moralistic
   southern wing and too far away from its libertarian western wing. He
   has allowed public spending to balloon and pork-barrel politicians to
   run wild. And he has ignored big changes in public opinion about
   climate change. The Republican Party certainly needs to update its
   agenda to deal with problems Reagan never grappled with. But this is
   no time to go breaking the mould and starting again.

