
   Local action against illegal immigration

   IN SEPTEMBER 2006 the city of Irving, close to Dallas, decided that it
   wanted to help fight illegal immigration. So it signed up for the
   Criminal Alien Programme (CAP). The programme, run by the Immigration
   and Customs agency, asks local law officials to give them a call if
   they suspect someone they have arrested may be an illegal immigrant.

   Irving is not the only city to have joined, but it is probably the
   most enthusiastic. Since CAP's inception, some 1,700 people from
   Irving, a city of officially about 200,000 souls, have been handed
   over for deportation. Opposition to CAP has suffered some
   public-relations setbacks. In November an activist, Carlos
   Quintanilla, was arrested after a policeman spotted him giving a
   television interview on East Irving Boulevard. He had seven
   outstanding warrants. But such moments aside, the programme's
   opponents are right to be concerned about it. They argue that it
   encourages racial profiling, is too punitive and harms families. No
   reliable measure exists of how many people have left the city out of
   fear or frustration, but the local school district says it has lost
   hundreds of students this year.

   Objecting from the other side are people who say that Irving policemen
   should not be asked to shoulder a federal task. In November the
   federal government asked north Texas officials to stop detaining
   people over traffic violations and certain misdemeanours, such as
   bouncing a cheque. There were too many referrals, they said, and not
   enough resources to look at them all.

   So the programme has its problems. And Irving is just one of several
   places in the Dallas-Fort Worth area to struggle with its response to
   illegal immigration. City commissioners in Collin County recently
   announced that non-profit clinics will not receive county money if
   they treat illegal immigrants. In May the suburb of Farmers Branch
   approved an ordinance that would require landlords to verify the legal
   status of prospective tenants. Landlords are contesting the ban,
   saying that it puts an undue burden on them, and lawsuits have
   prevented it from taking effect.

   Understandably, people who are frustrated by federal inaction on
   immigration may turn to local initiatives. But no one benefits when
   these are poorly conceived and arbitrarily applied.

