
   The Supreme Court calls a retreat in the drug wars 

   SINCE 1970, when the Controlled Substances Act was enacted, the number
   of people arrested for drug offences has risen from 416,000 to
   1,890,000 a year. Prisons are bursting at the seams: California's are
   at 191% of their official capacity. And drugs are both cheaper and
   more plentiful. Reversing this unlucky campaign will be no easier than
   staging a tidy withdrawal from Iraq. Yet this week judges took an
   important step in that direction.

   On December 10th the Supreme Court issued lenient rulings in two drug
   cases. The first was that of a small-time crack-cocaine dealer,
   Derrick Kimbrough, who had been sentenced to 15 years in prison.
   Although hardly a slap on the wrist, that was between four and
   seven-and-a-half years less than national sentencing guidelines
   dictated. The other case concerned Brian Gall, an otherwise upstanding
   fellow who had briefly traded ecstasy while a student at university.
   He, too, received a sentence more lenient than the guidelines
   suggested. Higher courts objected; but, by a seven-to-two margin in
   both cases, the judges upheld the milder sentences.

   If that was a tactical retreat in the war on drugs, the following day
   brought a headlong flight. The sentencing commission, which sets the
   guidelines that judges are supposed to follow, voted to reduce
   retroactively sentences for crack-dealing. Some 2,500 convicts will be
   let out next year, and almost 20,000 will be able to apply for shorter
   sentences.

   The Supreme Court cases turned on the issue of whether judicial
   discretion is more important than consistency in sentencing. But other
   issues intruded. The guidelines, which were laid down in 1986, were
   supposed to make punishment more predictable. Yet they also opened a
   racially tinged rift between sentences for trafficking different types
   of cocaine. When weighing a dealer's offence, judges have been
   expected to treat a gram of crack as equivalent to 100 grams (3.5
   ounces) of powder. The effect has been to stuff the prisons with
   blacks, who are two-and-a-half times as likely as whites to smoke
   crack.

   The judges' rulings do not mean an end to harsh sentencing. They allow
   more leeway rather than enforcing leniency, and do not apply directly
   to the state courts where most drug cases are heard. Yet they set a
   more moderate tone--a welcome contrast to the viciousness that has
   characterised the drug wars so far.

