
   The push for universal health care at last hits Congress

                                                                       AP
                                                                       AP

   "WE'RE right at the cusp of an ideological truce on health care,"
   declares a beaming Ron Wyden. The Democratic senator has reason to be
   pleased. A version of his Healthy Americans Act, an ambitious
   health-reform bill aimed at universal coverage that he has already
   introduced into the Senate, was due to go to the House this week. At
   that point, his bill will become the first bipartisan, bicameral
   congressional effort in over a decade to tackle the issue of extending
   health care to the country's growing legion of uninsured.

   Hillary Clinton's effort was the previous one: a disastrous attempt to
   promote a government-run health scheme at the start of her husband's
   first administration. That plan backfired, in part because the vast
   majority of Americans in 1993 had decent health-insurance plans
   through their employers and feared ending up worse off.

   Today, though, Americans are increasingly unhappy with the health
   system. Congressman Brian Baird, a co-sponsor of the House version of
   the universal-care bill, argues that many millions have lost their
   employer-provided insurance since the failure of the Clinton plan and
   even more fear they might. Such widespread insecurity has breathed new
   life into reform.

   Both versions of the bill require individuals to buy their insurance,
   and include insurance-market reform and subsidies to make sure that
   all Americans can do so. They also end the current tax break for
   health insurance provided by employers, which should break the link
   between insurance and employment by making coverage portable.

   That appeals to businesses, which, like individuals, are feeling
   increasingly insecure as the cost of employee health benefits
   continues to soar well above the rate of inflation. Wal-Mart,
   America's biggest retailer, has been loudly pushing for universal
   coverage, and the current bipartisan efforts in Congress have won
   praise from General Mills, a big cereal manufacturer, Aetna, an
   insurance giant, and other firms.

   The best reason to think that top-down reform might work comes,
   ironically, from bottom-up efforts. A number of states are now
   experimenting with health reform. Massachusetts already has a plan up
   and running that involves an individual requirement to buy coverage,
   subsidies for the poorest and a state-supervised insurance exchange.
   California's legislature is even now haggling with Governor Arnold
   Schwarzenegger over his plan for coverage, which adds an employer tax
   on top of the Massachusetts model (the Golden State has far more
   uninsured who need subsidies). This battle is expected to come to a
   head in September.

   With such activity at state level, some conservatives think Congress
   should do nothing. Mr Wyden strongly disagrees. He observes that even
   the most ingenious state cannot fix several of the central problems,
   including the Medicare scheme for the elderly and the federal tax
   break for employer-provided health insurance, which has encouraged
   profligacy.

   Federal efforts still face a formidable obstacle: the partisan
   slanging of the presidential election cycle. Congress and the White
   House even traded barbs this week over the State Children's Health
   Insurance Programme (SCHIP), a popular scheme that subsidises coverage
   for children. The Senate Finance Committee floated a plan to renew and
   expand SCHIP using money raised from new tobacco taxes. It had
   bipartisan support, yet the White House, playing to right-wing fears
   of creeping government expansion, threatened this week to veto the
   effort.

   Mr Wyden thinks this is just posturing. Soon, he believes, Congress
   will reach a compromise on the popular SCHIP programme, and then move
   on to real health reform. Perhaps he is right, for already in this
   campaign health care is the top domestic policy issue. John Edwards
   has proposed his universal-coverage plan, and Mitt Romney, a
   Republican ex-governor of Massachusetts, will make much of that
   state's health reforms if he wins his party's nomination.
   Perhaps--though don't hold your breath--the moment has indeed come for
   an ideological truce.

