
   The Republican battle for the religious vote gets rough 

                                                                  Reuters

                                  Reuters

                      Presidential, but under pressure


   A HANDFUL of protesters stood outside George Bush senior's
   presidential library. One handed out anti-Mormon pamphlets; another
   held up a pair of flip-flops. Inside, Mitt Romney gave a long-awaited
   speech, hoping to reassure religious Republicans that they can safely
   vote for a Mormon.

   He sorely needed to strike the right note. Many Republican primary
   voters, especially evangelical Christians, distrust his faith. In
   recent weeks, Mr Romney has lost his poll lead in Iowa and South
   Carolina to Mike Huckabee, a former governor of Arkansas and, more
   important, a charismatic, guitar-playing Baptist preacher.

   In his speech on December 6th, Mr Romney used the word "Mormon" only
   once. He mentioned only the Mormon beliefs which other Christians
   share, such as that Jesus is the son of God. Rather than getting
   entangled in theology, he made three broad points.

   If elected, he said, he would "serve no one religion, no one group, no
   one cause and no one interest". Echoing John Kennedy's promise in 1960
   not to take orders from the pope, he said that neither his church nor
   any other would tell him what to do.

   But whereas Kennedy said he believed in the "absolute" separation of
   church and state, Mr Romney qualified that a little. The founders
   barred the establishment of a state religion, he said, but "they did
   not countenance the elimination of religion from the public square."
   This was a sop to Christians who fret that militant secularists have
   gone too far in banning, for example, voluntary prayer in public
   schools.

   Mr Romney argued that a president's specific denomination is
   unimportant, so long as he has one. He embraced "our nation's symphony
   of faith", praising the profundity of Catholic ceremony, the ancient
   traditions of the Jews and the commitment to frequent prayer of the
   Muslims. He contrasted America's tradition of lively religious liberty
   with the deadening effect of state sponsorship in Europe. "I have
   visited many of the magnificent cathedrals in Europe. They are so
   inspired...so grand...so empty." And he promised to stand up to the
   other extreme, the theocratic tyranny of violent jihad.

   There was something for everyone in the speech, except atheists.
   Jacques Berlinerblau, the author of "Thumpin' It: The Use and Abuse of
   the Bible in Today's Presidential Politics", reckons that unbelieving
   Americans will feel excluded by lines such as "Freedom requires
   religion just as religion requires freedom." Pressed, Mr Romney admits
   he has no problem with atheists. But many of the conservative voters
   he is trying to woo do.

   And thanks to those voters Mr Huckabee's surge continues. Many
   evangelicals plainly feel more comfortable backing one of their own.
   Mr Huckabee himself stresses that no one should hold Mr Romney's
   religion against him. Perish the thought. But he bills himself as a
   Christian candidate, ignores the question when asked if Mr Romney is
   Christian too, and asks questions like: "Don't Mormons believe that
   Jesus and the devil are brothers?" (The Mormon church says this is a
   question often asked by those who wish to denigrate Mormonism; it
   refers to the Mormon belief that God is the father of all.)

   Mr Romney cannot plausibly hope that evangelicals will like him better
   than Mr Huckabee. But he might persuade them that Mr Huckabee is
   unelectable nationally. Free-market types gasp at the Arkansan's
   protectionist rhetoric. Deficit hawks shudder at his plan to abolish
   income tax. And Democrats salivate at the prospect of fighting a man
   who, however amiable, does not believe in evolution and was still
   arguing in the early 1990s that people with AIDS should be isolated.
   Evangelicals may love a hollering Southern preacher; swing voters are
   not so sure.

   Mr Romney launched his first television spot attacking Mr Huckabee in
   Iowa this week, accusing him of being soft on illegal immigration. In
   fact, both men, while governors, took a moderate and humane approach
   to illegals. But that is not what the conservative caucus-goers want
   to hear. It is shaping up to be a dirty, messy campaign.

