
   Politicians want to give the economy a boost. They're likely to make a
   hash of it

                                                                       AP
                                                                       AP

                                                       Mr Bush has a plan

   JUST occasionally, Washington's creaky political machine can whir into
   rapid action. Something of the sort is happening in the debate about
   fiscal stimulus. A month ago, a few academics were calling on Congress
   to spur the weakening economy with tax cuts or higher spending. Now,
   after a run of statistics suggest the economy has stalled, politicians
   of all stripes have jumped on the bandwagon.

   The White House wants to announce a stimulus package in George Bush's
   state-of-the-union address of January 28th. Nancy Pelosi, the speaker
   of the House of Representatives, wants the details hashed out before
   then. With neither party keen to face voters in the midst of a
   recession, legislation now seems quite possible. Less obvious is
   whether it will make any sense.

   Most economists agree on the characteristics of sensible fiscal
   stimulus: the measures should conform to three "T"s: timely,
   well-targeted and temporary. Take too long, and the recession could be
   over before stimulus is agreed. Target the money on people most likely
   to spend it and you get the most demand-boosting bang for the buck.
   Don't let the measures permanently worsen the government's budget
   position. Consensus is even emerging on the appropriate size of any
   boost: somewhere around $100 billion, a bit less than 1% of GDP. That
   could provide the economy with a significant short-term jolt.
   Calculations by Douglas Elmendorf of the Brookings Institution suggest
   that a temporary tax rebate worth $100 billion could boost the
   annualised rate of GDP growth by between 0.8 and 3 percentage points
   in the quarter in which it was enacted.

   Unfortunately, even the wonks do not agree on what measures best fit
   these criteria. At a Brookings Institution forum on January 10th,
   Martin Feldstein, a Harvard professor and leading Republican
   economist, argued for an income tax rebate and opposed extending
   unemployment insurance. Mark Zandi, head of [3]Moody's Economy.com,
   favoured more help for the jobless and a payroll tax holiday.
   Think-tanks have piled in too. The Economic Policy Institute wants
   job-generating infrastructure improvements. The Centre on Budget and
   Policy Priorities wants more help for struggling state governments.

   So far, the only politicians to weigh in with detailed plans are
   people who cannot enact them this year: presidential candidates. Some
   are reasonably sensible. Barack Obama, for instance, wants everyone to
   get a $250 tax cut, which would double if economic indicators continue
   to worsen. Others look more like a fiscal Christmas tree. Hillary
   Clinton wants a $70 billion package: $30 billion in housing
   assistance, $25 billion in home-energy subsidies, $10 billion on
   expanding payments to the unemployed and $5 billion for environmental
   projects. The Republican presidential candidates want to make Mr
   Bush's tax cuts permanent--an odd priority just now since they don't
   expire until 2010.

   Early indications suggest that both the White House and congressional
   leaders are eschewing such a fiscal free-for-all. The speculation is
   that Mr Bush will push for tax breaks for businesses and a tax rebate
   for individuals, but will not insist on extending his tax cuts. Top
   Democrats in Congress are also keen on a tax rebate, but they want to
   make sure it helps poorer consumers, perhaps by making it refundable
   for those who do not pay income tax. They also want more government
   spending, perhaps by extending unemployment insurance or by giving
   more money to the states.

   Barney Frank, an influential Democrat on economic issues, says that
   stimulus must pass before the end of February. But the coming
   negotiations could become a nightmare. In the Senate, 60 votes out of
   100 are needed to guarantee passage. Republicans may demand an
   extension to the Bush tax cuts. Individual senators are likely to add
   their pet projects and priorities. Gridlock could easily delay any
   compromise package past the point at which it would do the economy any
   good. The three "T"s may have become Washington's new mantra. But the
   odds of politicians delivering are still slim.

