
   But whose fault is that? 

   THE Democrats took control of Congress nearly a year ago with schemes
   to pump cash into domestic programmes, from low-income housing to
   cancer research. It hasn't quite gone according to plan. George Bush
   has waved his veto pen at the Democrats' recent budget proposals,
   accepting only a fat defence-spending bill. The result has been a
   stalemate, with the Democrats struggling to come up with a budget that
   will get past the president's desk, with only a week left before the
   Christmas recess in which to finish the job.

   Indeed, frustrated ambition has marked the Democrats' majority reign
   so far. In the summer they failed to make Mr Bush accept a deadline
   for withdrawing troops from Iraq. In October the president stopped
   them expanding a popular children's health-care programme. The Senate
   has just voted to waive its "pay-as-you-go" rule, which requires tax
   cuts to be offset by other revenue, thanks to filibustering by the
   Republican contingent. The federal budget is months overdue, and it
   appears that the Democrats will have to give in to many of Mr Bush's
   spending demands, even at the expense of the domestic programmes they
   wanted to augment. Will voters punish the Democrats at the 2008
   election for Congress's disappointing year, or will they whack the
   Republicans for their obstructionism?

   As far as the budget goes, the Republican minority clearly hopes the
   blame will rebound on the Democrats. Mr Bush has suddenly and
   conveniently adopted the language of fiscal restraint. He has argued
   that the Democrats' budget plan, which called for a small increase in
   domestic spending, was excessive and wasteful. He has doggedly stuck
   to his own budget outline, which calls for $23 billion less domestic
   expenditure than Congress's first plan, even as the Democrats have
   offered to meet him somewhere in between. (The Democrats' first
   proposed discretionary budget came to $956 billion, next to which the
   $23 billion that is causing the problem looks pretty small.)
   Meanwhile, the president's defence request is a 10% increase on last
   year's at $481 billion--and that excludes $196 billion for the
   campaigns in Iraq and Afghanistan.

   Republicans also may be holding the budget hostage in order to force
   the majority to authorise unfettered Iraq funding, which would rile
   the Democratic base. Still, the president has shown that he can
   extract his Iraq money from the Democratic Congress regardless by
   exploiting his veto and Democrats' unwillingness to block all funding
   while American soldiers are in the field. The Republicans can probably
   secure their war money without giving much on domestic spending.

   Now that Mr Bush has discovered the power of the veto pen, he sees
   little incentive to keep it in the inkwell. Those who still support
   him will only be heartened by his defiance, and legislative gridlock
   makes the Democrats seem incompetent. The Democrats have not helped
   themselves with their time-wasting on Iraq. But Mr Bush's tactics may
   hurt Republicans in tight races, particularly if the cuts to social
   services he envisions hit Americans as hard as some predict.

   The Democrats, meanwhile, complain that their slim majority (51-49) in
   the Senate has prevented them from passing ambitious legislation.
   Senate procedures, with all their talk of cloture and filibusters, are
   arcane; but if the Democrats can claim that the Republicans pressed
   for cuts to health care for children or winter heating assistance for
   the elderly, the message might resonate. Americans still tend to trust
   Democrats more than Republicans on domestic policy; with elections
   coming, now may not be the time for Republicans to rediscover their
   hard edges.

