
   The Republican Party is among the war's victims

                                                             Getty Images

                                Getty Images


   FOUR years ago, as American troops rolled across Iraq, the Republican
   Party was on a roll too. Republicans not only controlled the whole of
   Washington (seven of the nine Supreme Court justices had been
   appointed by Republican presidents). They controlled the majority of
   governorships as well--including those of mega-states such as Florida
   and New York--and they were winning the war of ideas, thanks to a
   division of conservative think-tanks.

   Republican strategists were consumed by heady visions of power without
   end. The "war on terror", which was dividing the Democrats, was
   encouraging Republican factions to bury their differences. Karl Rove,
   George Bush's chief strategist, liked to compare his boss to William
   McKinley, the late-19th-century president who had ushered in an age of
   Republican dominance. Grover Norquist, an anti-tax crusader, dubbed Mr
   Bush "Reagan's son".

   For a moment the 2004 election seemed to justify this vision, with an
   improved Republican performance among blacks, Hispanics and,
   particularly, women. But by 2007 the Democrats were back in control of
   both chambers of Congress and itching to retake the White House. Fully
   40% of Republicans believe that the Democrats will capture the
   presidency in 2008, compared with 12% of Democrats who think the
   Republicans will hang on to it. Ken Mehlman, the party chairman who
   oversaw the 2004 triumph, is now advising hedge funds on how to deal
   with a Democratic-leaning world. The Republicans may well be left with
   nothing except the solid South and a few patches of the Midwest, just
   as the Democrats were at the end of the 19th century.

   There are plenty of reasons for the party's agonies. The Republicans
   fell victim to all the diseases of incumbency--from spending like
   drunken sailors to corruption to cronyism--and the Bush administration
   made a hash of responding to Hurricane Katrina. But the Iraq war lies
   at the heart of the party's problems. The war has deprived Mr Bush of
   the oxygen of popularity. A recent CBS News/New York Times poll found
   that only 39% of Americans now think that invading Iraq was the right
   thing to do, compared with 55% who think it was a mistake. It has also
   provided the Democrats with a huge stick with which to beat the
   opposition.

   Far from uniting Republicans, the war is beginning to divide them. It
   is true that solid majorities of Republicans continue to believe that
   embarking on the war was the right decision (76%) and that America
   should stay until the job is done (71%). It is also true that the
   Democrats remain divided on the subject. But the wedge that Mr Bush
   fashioned in 2004 is now being driven into his own coalition, with
   sections of the conservative intelligentsia in full-scale revolt.

   Stephen Bainbridge, a conservative academic at the University of
   California, Los Angeles, has argued that Mr Bush's decision to go to
   war has "pissed away the conservative moment by pursuing a war of
   choice via policies that border on the criminally incompetent."
   William Buckley, the pope of the conservative movement, says that if
   Mr Bush were the leader of a parliamentary system, "it would be
   expected that he would retire or resign". Richard Viguerie, another
   conservative veteran, says that "I've never seen conservatives so
   downright fed-up as they are today."

   The war has eviscerated the administration's reputation for
   competence--and with it the idea that the Republicans have an inherent
   advantage as the "Daddy" party. An administration that once boasted
   about its clutch of CEOs will forever be remembered for phrases such
   as "slam dunk" (of WMD intelligence) and "Mission Accomplished", or
   for disasters such as the failure to prepare Walter Reed and other
   military hospitals to deal with casualties. The same CBS News/New York
   Times poll found that only 28% of people approved of Mr Bush's
   handling of the situation in Iraq.

   And that is hardly the limit of the damage. A CNN/ORC poll found that
   54% of people thought that the administration had deliberately misled
   the American people about whether Iraq had WMD. An ABC News/Washington
   Post poll in February found that 63% of respondents did not trust the
   Bush administration to report honestly about possible threats from
   other countries. The Democratic Party will use its majority status
   over the next couple of years to deepen the public's unease about the
   administration's conduct of the war. As a result, an "R" by a
   candidate's name could be even more of a scarlet letter in 2008 than
   it was in 2006.

   Mr Bush's mishandling of the war has damaged the Republican Party's
   two biggest advantages over the Democrats--its reputation for skilful
   foreign policy and for the unapologetic use of force. The likes of
   Richard Nixon, Henry Kissinger, George Bush senior and Brent Scowcroft
   clearly identified the Republicans with mastery of foreign policy.
   (Bob Woodward asked Mr Bush whether he had consulted his father before
   invading Iraq. The son replied that he had consulted a "higher
   father".) By contrast, the peace wing of the Democratic Party clearly
   linked the Democrats with being soft on defence.

   But the Iraq war has destroyed the Republicans' advantage of decades.
   The party is losing support even among the once solid armed services.
   Today only 46% of servicemen describe themselves as Republican,
   compared with 60% in 2004--and only 35% of them approve of the
   handling of the war. Voters are now much more willing to listen to the
   Democrats on war and peace. Barack Obama's statement in 2002--"I'm not
   opposed to all wars. I'm opposed to dumb wars"--is a perfect refrain
   for a resurgent party.

   The Iraq war has also eroded the Republicans' advantage in the "war on
   terror", not least because of Mr Bush's success in tying the two
   subjects together in the 2004 campaign. Many Republicans thought that
   the war on terror might have the same effect as the cold war,
   consolidating their party's hold on the executive branch (Democratic
   presidents had to wait until the end of the cold war to win two terms
   in the White House). But that now seems unlikely. The Republican
   Party's gigantic advantage in this area after September 11th has all
   but vanished. The same February ABC News/Washington Post poll found
   that 52% of respondents trusted the Democrats in Congress to do a
   better job of handling America's campaign against terrorism than Mr
   Bush.

   At the same time, the war has taken a huge toll on the
   administration's domestic policies. After the 2004 election Mr Bush
   sketched out an ambitious agenda for avoiding the fate of previous
   second-term presidents and moving the country in a more Republican
   direction: reforming immigration and Social Security, simplifying
   taxes and lifting regulations. That agenda has come to almost nothing.
   Senior figures have been constantly distracted by dealing with the
   fallout from Iraq. (One reason the administration was so tardy in
   dealing with Katrina was that Karl Rove was worried he might become a
   victim of the Plame affair.) In late 2005 the administration concluded
   that it was impossible to push through big initiatives, such as Social
   Security reform, in a time of war.

   The man who will pay the biggest political price for Iraq will
   ultimately be Mr Bush. It is hardly surprising that liberal historians
   debate whether he is the worst president ever. But now conservatives
   are beginning to play the same game. A recent poll of hard-core
   conservative activists found that only 3% described themselves as
   George Bush Republicans, compared with 79% who regarded themselves as
   Ronald Reagan Republicans. But the damage will not be limited to the
   party leader. For years to come, the Republicans will be paying a
   collective price for the "stuff" that happened in Iraq.

