
   Americans are in a funk. They should cheer up a bit



   "DUMB and Dumber", one of the modern classics of American comedy,
   tells the story of an affable idiot, Lloyd Christmas, who falls in
   love with a classy beauty, Mary Swanson. In one scene he asks her the
   chances of "a guy like you and a girl like me" ending up together. The
   answer is "Not good". "Not good like one out of a hundred?" asks
   Lloyd. "More like one out of a million," Mary replies. Lloyd pauses
   for a moment, then shoots back, "So you're telling me there's a
   chance?"

   That is the American spirit. Americans have traditionally been much
   more optimistic than Europeans, and happier too. They believe that
   people determine their own destinies rather than being the mere
   playthings of fate. They also believe that their children will have a
   better life than they do.

   This helps to explain the dynamism of the American economy. Americans
   regard failure--even bankruptcy--as a stone in the road rather than a
   damning verdict. It also helps to explain the appeal of the American
   experiment. "The American, by nature, is optimistic," JFK once said.
   "He is experimental, an inventor and a builder who builds best when
   called upon to build greatly." Europeans ask, "Why?" Americans ask,
   "Why not?"

   But the past five years have produced a dramatic souring in the
   country's mood. Three-quarters of Americans now think that the country
   is "on the wrong track". The number of people who are hostile to trade
   and immigration has risen sharply, as has the number who think that
   America should engage less in world affairs. Trust in government is
   half what it was in 2001. Both the president and Congress have
   bargain-basement approval ratings. And people are increasingly
   pessimistic about the future. Barely a third thinks that their
   children will be better off than they themselves are. The reason why
   the man with the message of hope, Barack Obama, and the man who hails
   from Hope, Mike Huckabee, are doing so well is that people think hope
   is in short supply.

   There are good reasons for this pessimism. People are tired of the
   Bush administration, with its partisanship and incompetence. The Iraq
   war has shattered America's image of itself as a mighty but
   good-hearted giant. Iraq means chaos and Abu Ghraib rather than the
   triumphant export of democracy. The war may be going better of late,
   but the majority of Americans still think that it was not worth the
   fighting, and the bad news about the economy is burying the good news
   about the "surge". Americans are accustomed to thinking of their
   houses as pots of gold (and pots of gold that can be remortgaged when
   you need a bit of extra cash). The gold is now turning into lead.

   This is creating a bull market in pessimism. The likes of Bill
   O'Reilly and Lou Dobbs have transformed themselves into cable stars by
   ranting about cultural decay and "broken borders". Patrick Buchanan's
   latest book is called "Day of Reckoning: How Hubris, Ideology and
   Greed are Tearing America Apart". "We are on a path to national
   suicide," he says. America is not just "coming apart", but also
   "decomposing".

   There is certainly no shortage of bad news. But coming apart?
   Decomposing? The current issue of Commentary--a magazine hardly noted
   for its sunny disposition--contains an excellent article, "Crime,
   Drugs, Welfare and Other Good News" by Peter Wehner (a former senior
   White House aide) and Yuval Levin, which shows why Mr Buchanan is
   talking through his hat.

   Both violent crime and property crime have declined dramatically since
   1973. New York City will probably notch up less than 500 murders this
   year, the lowest since the early 1960s (the figure for 1990 was
   2,262). Teenagers are cleaning up their act. Teenage drug use has
   fallen by 23% overall since the 1990s, and by 50% for LSD and ecstasy.
   Teens are drinking less, smoking less, having sex less and dropping
   out of school less. The birth rate for 15-19-year-olds has fallen by
   35% since 1991. At 10%, the high-school drop-out rate is at a 30-year
   low.

   Welfare reform is working. The welfare caseload has dropped by 60%
   since 1994. A series of social evils--overall poverty, child poverty,
   child hunger--have all decreased. Employment figures for single
   mothers have surged. The number of abortions fell from over 1.6m in
   1990 to fewer than 1.3m this year. The divorce rate is at its lowest
   level since 1970. Education scores are up.

   Things are not all hunky-dory. The violent crime rate has ticked
   upward in the past couple of years. Illegitimacy is at an all-time
   high. But this is a very different world from the 1970s, when
   America's leading cultural indicators all started to point towards
   Gomorrah. American civil society, aided by sensible social policies,
   is gradually repairing the damage of the past few decades.

   Lighten up, Pat

   What about Mr Buchanan's particular bugbear, immigration? For all the
   passion that this is igniting, America is blessedly free from the
   alienated immigrant populations that so trouble France and other
   European countries. America still has a genius for employing and
   assimilating newcomers. English classes are crammed and
   English-language tuition is a giant business. And America's ability to
   suck in and assimilate immigrants is part of a bigger and better
   story. European economies face profound long-term problems because of
   their citizens' reluctance to reproduce. Americans have the highest
   fertility rate of any rich country. That is a long-term vote of
   confidence in the country's future.

   In fact, Americans have always had a vigorous tradition of pessimism,
   in counterpoint to the optimistic one. In 1819 John Adams worried
   about the duration of "our vast American Empire". In 1948 Richard
   Hofstadter complained that "competition and opportunity" had gone into
   decline and that Americans were looking "wistfully back toward a
   golden age". Much of today's pessimism may prove as unfounded.
   Americans should rediscover the spirit of Lloyd Christmas, idiot
   though he was.

