
   How the interior is learning to live with a shrinking population

   IN EASTERN Colorado, the human tide ebbs. Cheyenne county, which had
   3,700 inhabitants in 1930, now has just 1,900. And the drift away from
   the area seems to be speeding up. In the old county jail, which is now
   a museum, a photograph from 1910 shows a three-storey schoolhouse
   towering over the town of Cheyenne Wells. The new school is one storey
   high--yet it already seems too big.

   America as a whole is growing briskly. Between 2000 and 2006 its
   population swelled by 6.4%, according to the Census Bureau. Yet the
   expansion has passed many areas by. Two-fifths of all counties are
   shrinking (see map). In general, people are moving to places that are
   warm, mountainous or suburban. They are leaving many rural areas, with
   the most relentless decline in a broad band stretching from western
   Texas to North Dakota. In parts, the Great Plains are more sparsely
   populated now than they were in the late 19th century, when the
   government declared them to be deserted.

   A big reason is improvements in farming technology. Tractors in
   eastern Colorado do not resemble the vehicles that trundle around
   farms on the east coast and in Europe. They are many-wheeled monsters,
   sometimes driven by global positioning systems. Toby Johnson says his
   40,000-acre (16,200-hectare) ranch in Cheyenne county employed between
   eight and ten workers in the 1950s. It now has two, including him.
   When old farmers retire, their plots tend to be swallowed up by
   larger, more efficient operators.

   The population of the Great Plains teeters on this shrinking
   agricultural base. While much of Colorado grew, Cheyenne county shrank
   every year between 2000 and 2006, when it lost more than 300 people.
   Children are disappearing even more quickly. Ten years ago 495 pupils
   enrolled in the county's public schools; this year 320 did. In Kit
   Carson, the second-biggest settlement, the school enrolled just four
   teenagers in the tenth grade. Shops and houses nearby are already
   boarded up. If the school were to close, there would be little reason
   for the town to exist at all.

   Rayetta Palmer, a councilwoman in Cheyenne Wells, can nonetheless cite
   a list of local strengths. The few children get lots of attention: Kit
   Carson's schools have a pupil-to-teacher ratio of seven to one,
   compared with 18 to one in Denver, the state capital. As a result,
   they do well in tests. Crime is rare. The community is strikingly
   cohesive: at the petrol stations that double as cafés, locals do not
   take empty tables but sit together, as in a school dining room.

   The trouble is that such qualities are not the sort of thing that
   might persuade businesses to move to the area. Some are more likely to
   deter them. The strong community spirit sometimes morphs into a fierce
   resistance to change, particularly when it is advocated by newcomers.
   Cindy Perry, who has tried to revitalise Kit Carson by renovating
   buildings and starting a shop, woke one morning to find a
   newly-painted building covered with graffiti.

   Fighting back

   Optimists point to two likely developments that may slow the decline.
   Assuming a power line is built, wind farms will probably appear in the
   area in the next few years, as they have in western Texas. That will
   generate construction jobs and tax revenues. A more ambitious proposal
   involves building a "super-highway" between Mexico and Canada, which
   would pass through eastern Colorado. Backers say it would almost
   double traffic through Cheyenne county, leading to an increase in jobs
   and perhaps even in people. Yet the road is many years from being
   built.

   Cheyenne county is not especially poor. Indeed, at the moment it is
   enjoying an agricultural boom. Heavy snow last winter, combined with a
   drought in Australia, means local wheat farmers have a large crop to
   sell at record prices, which touched $10 a bushel for the first time
   last month. In parts of north-east Colorado, corn farmers are
   profiting from a strong demand for ethanol. Yet the future of
   irrigated agriculture (the most profitable kind) is gloomy. In central
   Colorado, thirsty cities have been buying water rights from farmers.
   Elsewhere, farmers have been prevented from pumping groundwater by
   lawyers in Kansas, downriver. If the wells close, the corn boom will
   end.

   There is a somewhat drastic alternative. In the 1980s two academics
   from Rutgers University suggested turning the plains into a "buffalo
   commons", where the animals that grazed the area before white
   immigration would be encouraged to return. The idea was so unpopular
   that its authors occasionally had to be protected by police. But it is
   nonetheless coming to pass.

   Buffalo meat is leaner than beef, and thus well suited to contemporary
   health worries. Partly as a result, the buffalo are coming back: some
   62,000 were slaughtered between January and November last year, a 17%
   rise over a year earlier. Of the plains states, only North Dakota has
   openly mulled turning over large tracts of land to the furry
   megafauna. But other areas, including eastern Colorado, have preserved
   grasslands and are touting their natural resources and history--a
   vivid one of brutal treks and Indian massacres.

   Jo Downey of the Plains Development Corporation reckons nothing can
   stop the drift away from places like Cheyenne county, and others
   agree. The challenge for the future is not to stem the tide, but to
   keep life as pleasant as possible for those who remain. This is not an
   easy task. Compared with the consequences of rapid growth, such as
   traffic jams and illegal immigration, to which so much political
   energy is devoted, the problems of depopulation can appear
   intractable.

