
                                                         Kevin Kallaugher

                              Kevin Kallaugher

   Al Gore has more to lose than to gain from running for president

   THINGS just keep on getting better for Al Gore. He is not only a
   global-warming guru--the man who changed the climate of opinion on
   climate change--he is also an all-purpose political guru as well. He
   was mocked back in 2000 for accusing George Bush of "risky schemes".
   Since then Mr Bush has turned into a Pandora's box of risky schemes.
   He was ridiculed in America back in 2002 for denouncing the invasion
   of Iraq. Few would ridicule him today. Europeans only have to look at
   Mr Gore (and these days there is slightly more of him to look at) to
   think of what life might have been like without the Toxic Texan.
   Surely he will soon have a Nobel peace prize to add to his Oscar.

   Mr Gore remains a whirlwind of activity. His new book, "The Assault on
   Reason", lets the Bush administration have it with both barrels,
   accusing it of sacrificing evidence to ideology and constitutional
   restraints to zealotry. But he does not stop there. He worries about
   America's money-saturated politics. He lambasts television for
   infantilising the electorate. American democracy, it seems, is as sick
   as the planet.

   Soon he will reappear in his global-warming guise--this time as an
   impresario of nine simultaneous "Live Earth" pop concerts on seven
   continents, including Antarctica, on July 7th. These concerts will
   solidify Mr Gore's reputation among the young for "getting it". They
   will also publicise his new organisation, the Alliance for Climate
   Protection.

   All of which raises the question: should Mr Gore revive his political
   career? Rumours that he is planning to jump into the presidential race
   are everywhere. It is even said that his friends have established a
   secret campaign organisation. He has only to refuse a second helping
   of fried chicken, on the ground that he's watching his weight, and
   it's assumed he's running.

   Mr Gore is well enough known to get into the race late. And a late
   entry could well carry him all the way to the nomination--exciting the
   party's left, creating a media frenzy, and making Hillary Clinton and
   Barack Obama look like old news. "He's going to run," James Carville,
   a consultant-turned-pundit, has told Rolling Stone, "and he's going to
   be formidable."

   Formidable or not, Mr Gore should resist such siren voices. He may
   have been in the business since he was 28. He may have run for
   president before he was 40. But he is the very opposite of a natural,
   like Bill Clinton or Mr Obama. He looks horribly out of place in the
   political bear pit. And he consistently sells himself short as a
   politician--emphasising expediency over vision even when vision might
   have been in his interest, as when he all but ignored global warming
   in 2000.

   Mr Gore lost an unlosable election in 2000 (yes, he won the popular
   vote, but the election should never have been close). He had eight
   years of peace and prosperity behind him. His opponent was an
   inexperienced scamp who could not name the president of Pakistan. But
   Mr Gore sighed his way through the first debate and painted himself
   orange in the third. He could easily have solved the Monica problem by
   promising to be Bill Clinton without the blow jobs; instead he
   embraced a silly "people against the powerful" populism.

   At last, the real Al Gore

   Mr Gore's friends say that he has at last discovered his real
   self--casting off his old inhibitions and letting his passion rip. But
   surely he is only at ease with himself precisely because he has
   abandoned politics? And surely the old Gore would re-emerge if he made
   another bid for the White House? He would inevitably have to talk
   about more than global warming. And he would have to make a compromise
   with the campaign-finance system that he now excoriates. How long
   would it be before he found himself in a Buddhist temple begging for
   money?

   Mr Gore always gave the impression that he was in politics out of duty
   rather than vocation--his father, a self-made Tennessee senator,
   dearly wanted his son to be president. But that ambition became a
   prison for Mr Gore. It forced a natural introvert to spend his time
   with people and turned a natural didact into a deal-maker. More
   important, Mr Gore has found his real calling at last: as a public
   intellectual cum polemicist cum elder statesman. He is not a perfect
   polemicist. His style is on the stodgy side. His latest book goes over
   a lot of well-tilled ground about Mr Bush's "faith-based policies". He
   sometimes comes across as eccentric--as when he lambasts television
   for killing public discourse, then celebrates the internet as its
   potential saviour. A few minutes online, reading the zealots on either
   the right or the left, should have been enough to explode that
   illusion.

   Nevertheless the whole package is compelling. Mr Gore brings a unique
   qualification to his writing: the fact that he has operated at the
   highest level of government. He writes like somebody with something
   important to say. He packs his argument with facts and illustrations.
   Above all, he has a genius for getting his message
   across--button-holing leaders the world over, producing different
   versions of his book for children and young adults, training more than
   1,000 "climate messengers" and generally refusing to let go of the
   bone. "Those who believe all his garbage are going to be excited to
   death," Trent Lott, a senior Republican senator, sneered during Mr
   Gore's recent appearance before a congressional committee. But a
   surprising number of Republican backbenchers were quietly excited.

   Enoch Powell, a British politician, once remarked that "all political
   lives end in failure because that is the nature of politics and of
   human affairs." In one sense Mr Gore's career ended in spectacular
   failure--the presidency ripped from his grasp. But in another he won a
   rare chance at an afterlife. He is the country's conscience on its
   gas-guzzling ways. He is also the president America never had. Better,
   surely, to be a presidential might-have-been than just another member
   of the 2008 freak show.

