
   An idea revered in theory, not in practice

   BARACK OBAMA won the Iowa caucus on January 3rd with a message that
   emphasised hope, unity and working together across party lines. By
   doing so he may have dispatched a formidable foe: not Hillary Clinton,
   who fought back and won the New Hampshire primary, but Michael
   Bloomberg. For several years there have been rumours that the mayor of
   New York is considering an independent run for the presidency. These
   gained credence following his decision to speak at the University of
   Oklahoma's conference on bipartisanship, on January 7th.

   The point of the event, as David Boren, the university's president and
   a former senator, explained, was to "resurrect that kind of bipartisan
   statesmanship that united us as Americans to win the cold war." Some
   observers took this as a sign that the conference would be a sort of
   coming-out party for a Bloomberg campaign. And Mr Boren admitted that
   he would be tempted to support an independent candidate "if the two
   parties do not rise to the occasion."

   But after Iowa and New Hampshire there may be less space for a
   bipartisan candidate. Mr Obama is not soon going to be knocked out by
   Mrs Clinton, and John McCain, for the Republicans, has staged a
   remarkable resurrection: both men specialise in appealing across party
   boundaries. Mr Bloomberg, for his part, has repeated that he is not in
   the running, and said that he hoped the conference could serve as a
   "catalyst" for a more harmonious discourse.

   Bipartisanship is a popular cause. All the serious presidential
   candidates say they are for it. Republicans Mitt Romney and Rudy
   Giuliani were elected in the Democratic strongholds of Massachusetts
   and New York City respectively. Mrs Clinton, one of the most
   polarising women in politics, has a reputation for working well with
   her Republican colleagues in the Senate.

   This big talk may prove empty, as so often before. Faced with the
   choice between reaching across the aisle and ginning up turnout by
   appeals to the base, parties often yield to temptation. And
   politicians seldom police themselves. Even so, the spectre of a
   third-party candidacy is encouraging the Democrats and Republicans to
   behave a little better. Mr Bloomberg cannot afford to wait too long
   for the mask to crack.

