
   For foreign policy, read relations


   CANADIANS knew little about Stephen Harper's foreign policy when his
   Conservative government took office last year, for the simple reason
   that he had not articulated one. They still don't know much. Since the
   election, foreign policy has been dominated by just one issue, that of
   Canadian troops in Afghanistan. Now perhaps they are about to be
   enlightened.

   On July 15th the prime minister is due to head south on a tour that
   will take him to Colombia, Chile, Barbados and Haiti. An odd choice,
   perhaps. The Canadian foreign-policy establishment, in tune with the
   previous Liberal government, likes to make much of the country's
   mission to help Africa. And going to Colombia, rather than say Mexico
   or Brazil, is a brave--or some might think odd--move when its
   president, Álvaro Uribe, is under attack in America and Europe for his
   alleged disregard for human rights.

   Mr Harper's answer is that Latin America is part of Canada's
   "neighbourhood". Two-way trade with the region is growing, and
   amounted to C$39 billion ($34 billion) last year--less than 5% of
   Canada's total trade but 15% of the portion that doesn't involve the
   United States. It is an important destination for Canadian investment,
   especially by mining firms. As for Colombia, Canadians buy its
   cocaine, and thus contribute to its human-rights problems. And Mr
   Harper's trip overlaps with a separate one by the governor-general,
   Michaëlle Jean, to Brazil.

   Some Canadians see Mr Harper's trip as part of his general desire to
   be in step with George Bush. The prime minister has made smooth
   relations with the United States a priority. Afghanistan has become
   the top recipient of Canadian aid. Mr Harper's government has given
   outspoken support to Israel; its relations with China have been
   strained. Nevertheless, this week Mr Harper announced plans to
   purchase up to eight patrol ships for light ice-breaking duties to
   assert Canadian sovereignty over Arctic seaways, which is contested by
   the United States.

   In fact, in much of this there is more continuity than change.
   Relations with Latin America have been getting closer since the
   signing of the North American Free-Trade Agreement with Mexico in
   1992. It was the Liberal government which deployed combat troops to
   Afghanistan; while it talked of a balanced policy in the Middle East
   it tended to take Israel's side when it counted. And few Canadian
   prime ministers have allowed all-important relations with their
   American neighbour to deteriorate.

   Perhaps the main innovation is plain speaking and the dropping of any
   pretence of an over-arching vision. Mr Harper's foreign-policy
   adviser, Roy Rempel, has argued that the myth of Canadians as the
   world's peacekeepers and do-gooders should yield to blunt
   considerations of national interest. Another interpretation is that Mr
   Harper has decided not to have a foreign policy, merely reacting to
   crises and opportunities as they arise.

   This, says Adam Chapnick, of the Canadian Forces College, is in
   keeping with an old Conservative tradition dating back to Canada's
   first prime minister, Sir John Macdonald. When trade relations with
   the United States were debated in the House of Commons, he apparently
   brought two speeches with him--one in support and one opposed--and
   then used the one that contradicted the Liberal stand.

