


   What the loss of a key ally means for the Lula government


   AS THE president of the Senate, Renan Calheiros was perhaps the most
   powerful ally of President Luiz Inácio Lula da Silva in Brazil's
   legislature. Seven months ago, the media, acting on tip-offs from the
   federal police, accused him of getting a lobbyist for a construction
   firm to make regular child-maintenance payments to his former
   mistress. On December 4th Mr Calheiros finally resigned his post.

   Thus ended a tenacious rearguard action. As well as the link with the
   lobbyist, Mr Calheiros was alleged to have used shell companies to buy
   two radio stations and a newspaper in his home state, and to have paid
   for a dossier digging up dirt on his enemies in the Senate. He
   protested his innocence. Then his mistress was photographed for
   Playboy (in the same pose as Christine Keeler, a big-eyed brunette who
   ended the career of a British minister in 1963). Mrs Calheiros stood
   by her man. But on December 4th, moments before a crucial vote in the
   Senate ethics committee that would probably have ended his career, Mr
   Calheiros gave in.

   By resigning his presidency before the vote, Mr Calheiros holds on to
   his seat in the Senate. (Had he been censured, he would have been
   barred for eight years from running for office.) That outcome suits
   the government. Indeed, Mr Calheiros's resignation was probably
   negotiated with Lula's men. That is because government support for Mr
   Calheiros was seen as necessary to get through the Senate the renewal
   of the CPMF, a tax on financial transactions worth 30 billion-40
   billion reais ($17 billion-22 billion) a year.

   The twists of the Calheiros affair have nonetheless slowed the
   government down. Getting the CPMF approved has now become a matter of
   urgency. It is meant to be a provisional tax (and is therefore subject
   to periodic renewal). But it is also a constitutional measure,
   requiring a 60% majority. It always generates a tussle. This year the
   fight is particularly intense--so much so that Lula has cancelled his
   foreign trips next week so that he can stay in Brasília and twist
   arms.

   The president has formidable political instincts: one of his staffers,
   who also worked for Brazil's previous president, says that Lula "can
   just smell politics". But he does not expend much energy on managing
   his unwieldy coalition in the legislature. It does not help him that
   next year there will be municipal elections. Not all of the opposition
   parties, who have half the Senate seats, want to help swell government
   coffers before an election year.

   The main cause of the government's difficulties, though, springs from
   Brazil's recent success. Last month the country recorded a small
   current-account deficit, but overall the economic picture is rosy. In
   fact, tax revenues are so buoyant that the government is finding it
   hard to convince congressmen that it needs more money.

   One reason for this abundance is that the CPMF makes tax evasion
   harder, by giving the revenue service information on money moving
   between accounts. Nuno Camara of Dresdner Kleinwort, an investment
   bank, has calculated that the government's tax take has already
   surpassed its own estimates for 2008 by more than 30 billion reais,
   roughly equivalent to what it might expect to get from the CPMF. "If
   you compare the situation now with when we introduced this tax, things
   are completely different," says Paulo Renato Souza, a congressman for
   the opposition PSDB party and former education minister.

   For its part, the government is trying every legal method it can think
   of to get the tax renewed--including cutting its rate from 0.38% to
   0.3% over the next five years, and exempting low earners. The
   government has also revived a proposal to limit increases in
   government salaries to inflation plus 2.5%. "Brazil does need to lower
   its tax burden," says Aloizio Mercadante, a senator for the ruling PT,
   "but suddenly depriving the government of a main source of its revenue
   is not the way to do it."

   A smoother way to lower the government's future appetite for tax
   revenue would be to use money from the CPMF to reduce debt faster.
   Public debt, net of government assets, still stands at 43.5% of GDP.
   That figure is higher than the average for countries which enjoy the
   investment-grade credit rating to which Brazil aspires. Though less so
   than in the past, this debt is still expensive: the government pays a
   real interest rate of 7%. It is also relatively short-term: some 30%
   matures every year. Mr Calheiros's continued presence in the Senate,
   where he still has a great deal of influence, will probably make the
   passage of the CPMF easier. For the government, some good may yet come
   from his less than glorious career.

