
                                                                  Reuters

                                  Reuters

   Sucre and La Paz slug it out. More's the pity

   FOR three centuries under several different names, the pleasant,
   whitewashed town of Sucre was the capital of what is today Bolivia.
   Hit by the decline of the nearby silver mine at Potosí, in 1898 it
   lost its political pre-eminence to La Paz, some 400 kilometres (250
   miles) to the north. But Sucre, a quiet place of many lawyers'
   offices, remains the seat of the judiciary, an ancient university and
   the Catholic church. Now its people scent a chance to recover its lost
   status.

   That chance comes from the fact that for the past year a Constituent
   Assembly, charged with drawing up a new constitution, has sat in the
   town. Evo Morales, Bolivia's president, wants the assembly to
   "refound" the country, giving more power to Andean Indian groups and
   to the state. But his Movement to Socialism is divided, and many of
   his proposals arouse fierce opposition in business-minded eastern
   Bolivia. The assembly is unlikely to finish its work by its deadline
   of August 6th.

   That is good news for Sucre, which has profited from the sojourns of
   assembly members and their attendant court of lobbyists and
   demonstrators. The town wants to make this trade permanent, by
   switching the political capital back to Sucre from La Paz. The
   opposition backs this demand.

   Sited in a volcanic crater 3,600 metres (11,800 feet) above sea level,
   La Paz is a breathlessly impractical capital. Its links to the rest of
   the country all pass through its twin city of El Alto, a stronghold of
   Mr Morales. Twice in two years protesters in El Alto blockaded access
   to the capital, causing governments to fall, paving the way for Mr
   Morales's election in December 2005. And installing the capital in
   Sucre would help the surrounding dirt-poor Potosí region.

   Mr Morales opposes the move, as an unnecessary diversion from the
   assembly's business. Not surprisingly, La Paz is having none of it. On
   July 20th hundreds of thousands of people took to the streets of El
   Alto to oppose the move (see picture). They will surely prevail. But
   perhaps the saddest side to this debate is that both cities, rightly,
   see government as the route to prosperity. Mr Morales boasted recently
   that the state now controls 20% of the economy (excluding the
   government itself), up from 6% when he took office. Whether that will
   make Bolivians richer remains to be seen.

