
                                                            Peter Schrank

                               Peter Schrank

   Venezuela and Brazil battle quietly over the shape of a planned
   regional development bank


   THERE have been few more assiduous customers of the International
   Monetary Fund and the World Bank than Latin American governments. Even
   as they privately welcomed the economic rationality that comes with
   loans from the fund and the bank, the region's leaders often blamed
   them for unpopular but needed measures. So it is not surprising that
   many Latin Americans revile the two multilateral institutions. They
   see them as dominated by the United States, and as having imposed the
   "Washington consensus" of macroeconomic stability at the expense of
   other priorities.

   It is that sentiment that Hugo Chávez, Venezuela's leftist president,
   is trying to tap with his plan for a Banco del Sur (Bank of the
   South), a development bank funded and run by Latin American countries
   themselves. If all goes to plan, it will be formally launched next
   month, and could start operating next year. The preparatory talks
   involve Argentina, Brazil, Bolivia, Ecuador and Paraguay as well as
   Venezuela.

   But there is a big difference between Mr Chávez's vision for the bank
   and that of others, especially Brazil. This will probably be papered
   over at a meeting in Rio de Janeiro on May 11th--but it just might
   develop into an open split between South America's two most powerful
   countries.

   Mr Chávez sees his bank as part of a wider anti-American political
   project and as an alternative to the IMF and the World Bank, from
   which he says Venezuela will withdraw. He has re-nationalised
   American-owned telecoms and electricity companies. He also threatens
   to pull out of the Organisation of American States if its sister body,
   the Inter-American Human Rights Court, condemns his government in a
   pending media-freedom case.

   It is one thing to badmouth the multilaterals but another to leave
   them, even for oil-rich Venezuela. Pulling out of the IMF would amount
   to a technical default on Venezuela's bonds and would raise the cost
   of future borrowing. Leaving the World Bank would tear up bilateral
   investment treaties that Venezuela has signed with other countries
   (and which use the bank's investment-dispute machinery).

   With the oil price high, Mr Chávez seems happy to alienate foreign
   investors. Others are not. Both Argentina and Brazil have taken
   advantage of economic growth and high commodity prices to pay off
   their debts to the IMF. Neither talks of leaving the fund. Bolivia's
   Evo Morales is one of Mr Chávez's closest disciples, but his finance
   minister says that joining the Bank of the South would not mean
   pulling out of the IMF.

   Ecuador's Rafael Correa shares Mr Chávez's ideas for the new bank. At
   a meeting of finance ministers in Quito earlier this month, he said it
   should combine the emergency-aid functions of the IMF with the project
   lending of the World Bank and the Inter-American Development Bank.

   But the ministers did not approve that proposal. They decided that the
   Bank of the South would be just a "development bank", adding that a
   stronger regional reserve fund (a small one already exists) might be
   created at a later stage. Brazil's finance minister, Guido Mantega,
   had already rejected the idea that the new bank might provide
   financial first-aid without the tough conditions the IMF imposes. He
   called for "modesty and parsimony" in any new body.

   After the meeting, Mr Mantega said that each country should contribute
   between $300m and $500m to the bank's capital. If so, no single
   country would dominate it, though a coalition of Mr Chávez's closest
   allies might. Brazil's contribution, Mr Mantega suggested, would come
   from the national development bank, the BNDES. The development
   minister, who controls the BNDES, promptly rejected the idea. Though
   Mr Mantega committed Brazil to the bank, the foreign ministry says the
   government is still "analysing" the idea.

   There are existing South American bodies that could serve as the
   nucleus for the new bank, including the Andean Development Corporation
   (CAF) and the Fund for the River Plate Basin (Fonplata). They are not
   political vehicles. Last year CAF lent over $5 billion. Its Bolivian
   chairman, Enrique García, has said he welcomes any fresh initiatives
   along the same lines. But many within CAF doubt that the Bank of the
   South is viable.

   The debate over the bank reflects a broader struggle for influence in
   South America between Brazil and Venezuela. Brazil's president, Luiz
   Inácio Lula da Silva, has a good relationship with George Bush, whom
   he has met twice in recent weeks. But he has always got along with Mr
   Chávez too, doing little to challenge the Venezuelan's pretensions to
   regional leadership. This friendship goes down well with many in
   Lula's Workers' Party, but it has made Brazil look indifferent to Mr
   Chávez's assaults on Venezuelan democracy.

   Recently, Brazil has distanced itself from Venezuela on some issues.
   In March its communications minister compared Venezuela's state
   television to Cuba's--the closest any Brazilian official has come to
   criticising the anti-democratic drift of Mr Chávez's rule. The two
   countries disagree about energy policy. Mr Chávez echoed Fidel Castro
   in attacking ethanol, just when Lula and Mr Bush agreed to encourage
   its production.

   Brazil's testiness with Venezuela has been sharpened by Bolivia's
   treatment of Petrobras, the state-owned energy firm. A year ago, egged
   on by Mr Chávez, Mr Morales "nationalised" oil and gas, forcing
   Petrobras to accept harsh new terms for its Bolivian operations. On
   May 6th Mr Morales issued a decree giving Bolivia's state-owned YPFB a
   monopoly of sales from Petrobras's two Bolivian refineries, in effect
   expropriating their cash flow. This time Brazil's government weighed
   in to condemn the property grab, giving warning that it could hurt
   relations between the two countries. Petrobras has issued an
   ultimatum: buy the two refineries for a fair price or face
   international arbitration.

   There is an "inflection" in Brazilian policy, with Lula drawing back
   from Venezuela and moving towards pragmatic governments in Chile and
   Peru, argues Sérgio Amaral, a former development minister. But, he
   adds, there are "clear limits" to this.

   These are defined partly by business interests. Brazil's exports to
   Venezuela rose by 60% last year. Brazilian multinationals are
   investing heavily. Odebrecht, a construction company, has built a new
   metro line in Caracas and a bridge over the Orinoco, and is building a
   $2.5 billion hydroelectric dam. Braskem, Odebrecht's petrochemicals
   arm, has a $3 billion partnership with state-owned Pequiven, which
   includes building two plants to produce plastic resins. Companhia Vale
   do Rio Doce is eyeing Venezuela's mineral riches.

   So although Brazil may either stall or moderate the plan for a Bank of
   the South, it is unlikely to reject it outright. But next time a
   financial crisis shakes Latin America, expect governments to turn
   again to the IMF rather than to Caracas.

