
                                              Rafael Andrade/Folha Imagem

                        Rafael Andrade/Folha Imagem

   Edir Macedo (pictured below) and his Universal Church have prospered
   by offering a religion "of results" to the upwardly mobile

   THE Tuesday-lunchtime exorcism at the São Paulo cathedral of the
   Universal Church of the Kingdom of God is well-attended, as always. On
   stage a woman in a brown trouser suit is moaning into a microphone,
   her back to the audience. Her voice flits uncontrollably between gruff
   low tones and high-pitched squeaks. This is the devil talking. He has
   been with her ever since the mistress of her philandering husband went
   to an African cult and put a spell on her. The congregation prays, the
   priest puts his hands on her and the devil is cast out, leaving its
   former host exhausted and shivering.

   Brazil is fertile land for Pentecostalism, a strain of Christianity
   characterised by the belief that God performs miraculous works for his
   faithful so regularly that they can be written into a timetable. The
   best guess of the World Christian Database, an American statistical
   service, is that Brazil has 24m Pentecostal Christians, compared with
   5.7m in the United States, where modern Pentecostalism began.

   The Universal Church is only the third-biggest Pentecostal group in
   Brazil, but it is the most ambitious. It has branches in 172
   countries, but in Brazil it also has its own political party (the
   Partido Republicano Brasileiro, or PRB) and owns Rede Record, the
   second-largest television network (which includes a 24-hour news
   channel).

   The man behind this religious conglomerate is Edir Macedo, known by
   his followers as "the Bishop". One of the world's most successful
   religious entrepreneurs, he does not give interviews. But two of his
   journalists have recently published his authorised biography, "The
   Bishop: the Revelatory Story of Edir Macedo".

   Despite the subtitle, the book gives little away. He describes his
   arrest for charlatanism in 1992 as a blow "like a heart attack", but
   does not deal with the substance of the allegation (he was released
   after just 12 days). The book is long on trivia (Mr Macedo confides
   that his favourite cologne is Acqua di Parma and discusses his large
   collection of Italian silk ties). But there is nothing on the church's
   finances.

   Mr Macedo was born to a fairly comfortable middle-class family that
   became less so when his father died. He and his brothers hawked snacks
   made by their mother round the industrial districts of São Cristovão,
   in Rio de Janeiro state. Mr Macedo got his first regular job in the
   Rio state lottery, thanks to a family political connection. He studied
   at night. His description of his conversion from Catholicism is oddly
   muted.

   From its foundation in 1977, the Universal Church has stressed that
   the faithful would be rewarded for sacrifices, usually of a financial
   kind. Followers are asked to give 10% of their income; "the church of
   results" will then reward them with blessings, in the form of
   miraculous healing, or success for their families or at work. Church
   services often revolve around testimonies of such results. "Offerings
   [to God] are investments," says Mr Macedo.

   Selling prosperity theology to the poor attracts criticism from those
   who believe that the Universal Church exploits the credulity of the
   desperate. In his book Mr Macedo defends himself robustly. Those who
   earn nothing can still come to services and enjoy the large
   air-conditioned hall and a clean bathroom without paying. They may go
   away determined to succeed, and might even give up drinking, stop
   beating their wives and join the church. "Whom have I harmed? That is
   the question: whom have I harmed?" He attacks the Catholic Church for
   eulogising poverty.

   Mr Macedo's success has brought growing influence in Brazilian public
   life. He has built Rede Record, bought for $45m in 1990, into a
   powerful rival to Globo, the country's leading broadcaster. Though the
   Universal Church provides a captive audience for its religious
   programming, Record has grown mainly by showing popular American shows
   and investing in its own telenovelas (soaps). It has secured exclusive
   rights to the Beijing Olympics.

   The PRB, founded in 2005, has only four of the 513 seats in the
   federal Chamber of Deputies. It is driven by pragmatism rather than by
   ideology (it is not hostile to abortion, for example). Its main
   purpose appears to be to defend the interests of the Universal Church
   by deterring attacks from its powerful enemies, which include the
   Catholic church and Globo.

   Preaching in his São Paulo cathedral, Mr Macedo is soothing, his
   message backed by rising chords played on a synthesiser. He asks the
   congregation to talk to God, and a couple of thousand private
   conversations resonate in the hall. Some people start to cry, others
   hold their arms aloft. Then the Bishop gets on to the subject of
   offerings. To sacrifice is divine, he tells the congregation. Maybe
   so, but to devise ingenious business models is human.

