
   Is Fidel Castro about to return?


   IT WOULD be an extraordinary comeback, but it no longer seems
   unlikely. After he underwent intestinal surgery last year and
   apparently suffered grave complications, Fidel Castro, Cuba's
   president, seemed to be wasting away and to have only weeks more to
   live. But now there is much speculation in Havana that Mr Castro will
   choose May 1st, which his regime traditionally celebrates with a mass
   demonstration, to make his first public appearance since last July.

                                                                      AFP

                                    AFP

             As I was saying before I was so rudely interrupted

   Officially, the health of Mr Castro, who is aged 80, is a state
   secret. But Venezuela's president, Hugo Chávez, recently declared that
   his close friend had "almost totally recovered". Over the past few
   weeks Granma, the main state-owned daily newspaper, has carried a
   series of editorials signed by Mr Castro, in which he has addressed
   issues ranging from ethanol to the case of Luis Posada Carriles, an
   exile accused of terrorism (see [4]article).

   On April 21st Cuban media published photographs showing Mr Castro with
   a visiting Chinese official in Havana. He has visibly put on weight
   again. Images released previously seemed designed merely to dispel
   rumours that he had died. This time they showed the track-suited
   president involved in the business of government. "Compañero Fidel
   exchanged ideas with the politburo member for an hour," the paper
   reported. The message was clear: Mr Castro has not retired.

   His reappearance in the flesh, if it happens, will be greeted with joy
   by some Cubans and dismay by others. It will also ensure that nothing
   much changes in the communist island. Last July the government
   announced that Mr Castro had turned over power to his younger brother,
   Raúl, and a collective leadership. The transfer of power went
   smoothly.

   The only Cubans in a position to notice any change were those at the
   top of the government. Raúl Castro is very different in temperament
   from his brother. He keeps regular office hours, shuns publicity and
   likes to delegate. According to a foreign diplomat ministers seem far
   more relaxed, perhaps because "no one is phoning them in the middle of
   the night."

   Raúl Castro is widely thought to be keen on encouraging more private
   enterprise (though he is not known to have any desire for political
   liberalisation). But there is no sign of this happening soon. Several
   commissions have been set up to look at the way the country is run.
   One is examining the socialist property system. But even its
   preliminary findings are not due for three years.

   Reformers within the Cuban leadership were never likely to show their
   hand while Fidel Castro remained alive. But now there is a new
   uncertainty. Does the president intend to take back some of his powers
   and functions? There has been speculation that he might assume a
   quasi-monarchical role, leaving Raúl and others to run the government.
   But in almost half a century in power, Cuba's president has never
   shown himself to be someone willingly to take a back seat.

