
   Raúl Castro's wife dies; the EU opens talks; Fidel continues to
   pontificate

                                                             Rex Features

                                Rex Features

      Vilma, fascinated by Fidel, when the revolution was still young


   "EVERYONE was waiting, some with sadness and others with oligarchic
   glee, for the crumbling of the Cuban Revolution." So says Fidel Castro
   this week in the latest of a series of articles published in Granma,
   the official Communist Party newspaper. The president was referring to
   the so-called "special period" in the early 1990s, following the
   collapse of the Soviet Union. But he could just as easily have been
   referring to the past year.

   It has been nearly 11 months since he fell ill with what was at first
   presumed to be cancer, and ceded day-to-day power to his younger
   brother, Raúl. Obituaries of the man who has led Cuba for nearly half
   a century were hastily dusted down and commentators began speculating
   about "Cuba after Fidel". Too soon. After a series of operations for
   abdominal problems, the president, now 80, has recently been showing
   that there is life in the old man yet. Little has changed since he
   stepped down: "no increase in opposition activity, and no real
   innovation in economic policy," says Philip Peters of the Lexington
   Institute, an American think-tank.

   But even the Castro family is not immortal, as demonstrated this week
   by the death of Vilma Espín, Raúl's wife and Cuba's unofficial First
   Lady (Fidel's various partners have tended to stay out of the public
   eye). She was 77, one year older than her husband. Ms Espín helped
   organise an urban uprising against Fulgencio Batista, Cuba's military
   dictator, who was overthrown by Fidel Castro in 1959. Despite her
   upper-class background--she did a year of graduate study at the
   Massachusetts Institute of Technology in the United States--she took
   to the communist rebels wholeheartedly, later joining Fidel's
   revolution in the mountains, where she also first met Raúl.

   Ms Espín was the most politically prominent woman in Cuba. She was a
   member of the Politburo from 1980 until 1991 and frequently escorted
   Fidel to official events. But her death will not affect the
   generational struggle that seems to be under way behind the acting
   president. Carlos Lage, the vice-president, and Felipe Pérez Roque,
   the foreign minister, remain the two most prominent younger
   politicians; Ricardo Alarcón, leader of the National Assembly, and
   Ramiro Valdés, a former interior minister and now minister of
   communications, are the two most prominent elder statesmen after Raúl.

   In fact there seems little chance of either of the two Castro brothers
   disappearing from the political scene in the near future. Although
   Fidel has not appeared at a public event since stepping down, he has
   been seen on television talking to visiting dignitaries, and appears
   to be recovering from whatever it was that ailed him (officially a
   state secret, though believed to be diverticulitis, an intestinal
   disorder).

   But if little seems to be changing inside Cuba, its long-strained
   relations with the West may be easing. This week the European Union
   invited a Cuban delegation to Brussels for a "political dialogue"--the
   first official contact in four years. Human rights will certainly be
   on the agenda. What else they might discuss or who might attend
   remains vague.

   In the United States meanwhile a March poll by Florida International
   University of Cuban Americans in the state found that 65% favour
   dialogue with Cuba. That is up from 55% in 2004 and the biggest
   proportion supporting dialogue since polling began in 1991. As
   America's presidential election nears, this might at last begin to
   encourage American politicians to stand up to the powerful Cuba lobby
   that has resisted any negotiation with Castro's government for so
   long.

