
   After an unimpressive year, a reshuffle


   SHE floated to office a year ago in a warm bubble of popularity. But
   not much has since gone right for Michelle Bachelet, a Socialist who
   is Chile's first woman president. Her difficulties began with
   unexpectedly multitudinous protests by schoolchildren. They have
   included a slowdown in economic growth, from 5.7% in 2005 to 4% last
   year, which some Chileans think may reflect lack of confidence in the
   government. They culminated in a botched new bus system in Santiago,
   the capital, which has frayed tempers.

                                                                       AP
                                                                       AP

                                                 The president says sorry

   Not all of this is the president's fault, but it has happened on her
   watch. Ms Bachelet's warm rapport with voters made her a good
   campaigner. Yet many politicians, not just of the opposition but also
   in the ruling centre-left coalition known as the Concertación, had
   long said that she lacked the skills needed to govern effectively.
   That perception now seems to have spread. In a poll in March by La
   Tercera, a newspaper, 71% of respondents thought that the president
   had little authority and 61% lacked confidence in her capacity to
   handle a crisis.

   On March 26th a chastened Ms Bachelet apologised to the public for the
   foul-ups of Transantiago, the new bus system, and reshuffled her
   cabinet for the second time. But will that do the trick? The changes
   have been welcomed. The new transport minister, René Cortázar, is an
   experienced Christian Democrat. But sorting out Transantiago will be a
   long haul: it is dogged by a shortage of buses and bus lanes, and the
   satellite-navigation system supposed to control bus schedules is not
   working.

   The new political co-ordinator, José Antonio Viera-Gallo, is a former
   Socialist senator who has the political experience, contacts and
   intellectual weight that Ms Bachelet herself lacks. Some hope that Mr
   Viera-Gallo will assume the role of de facto prime minister.

   The government can point to some achievements. It has drawn up and
   sent to Congress a reform of the private-pension system, an important
   and politically complex issue. It has opened 800 new childcare centres
   and extended a low-cost health-care scheme. After some initial
   difficulties, it has ridden out the problems caused by Argentina
   cutting Chile's imports of natural gas.

   But Ms Bachelet may have overestimated Chileans' appetite for change.
   The government could have prepared the public better for the new
   transport system, which is not as bad as the griping suggests. Some of
   the criticism of the president may be motivated by machismo, but she
   in turn has encouraged it with gesture politics.

   She inherited Latin America's strongest political coalition, yet she
   promised to reach over the heads of its parties and create a
   "government of citizens". At first she insisted on appointing a
   cabinet with an equal number of men and women, picking ministers
   without regard for their political skills or for their party. After a
   year, however, people want results rather than just empathy and a
   smile, Jaime Ravinet, a leading Christian Democrat, admitted in a
   recent newspaper interview.

   At least the reshuffle gives the president an opportunity for a new
   start. Whether she seizes it is another matter. Her critics in the
   Concertación say she has not let her ministers govern, trusting
   instead in a hermetic group of personal advisers of no great ability.

   Her next challenge may be public order. The government has played down
   sometimes violent protests over Transantiago. The schoolchildren and
   students remain restless. Far-left groups have resurfaced, some of
   which may be armed. Despite the backbiting, the economy remains
   robust. Chile's democracy is stable and increasingly vigorous--it took
   the death last year of Augusto Pinochet, the former dictator, in its
   stride. But the previous Concertación governments did not take these
   things for granted.

