
   FARC rebels free two women hostages

   HELLISH tales of men chained to trees, debilitating diseases, and
   surgery carried out with a kitchen knife have emerged from Colombia's
   jungles with the release of two women held captive by leftist FARC
   rebels for the past six years. It is believed to be the first time
   hostages have been freed without any quid pro quo.

                                                                      AFP
                                                                      AFP

                                 Out of the jungle: grandmother Gonzáles 

   After a botched release attempt in December, Clara Rojas and Consuelo
   González de Perdomo were handed over to a Venezuelan-led commission on
   January 10th and flown to Caracas, the Venezuelan capital, to greet
   awaiting relatives and a beaming Hugo Chávez, Venezuela's president,
   who had brokered the deal.

   Colombians were gripped with horror mixed with fascination as the two
   former Colombian politicians recounted the ordeals they and their
   fellow captives had had to withstand. The 44-year-old Ms Rojas, who
   gave birth to a baby boy fathered by one of her captors in 2004,
   underwent a caesarean on a wooden table. The child, named Emmanuel,
   was taken from her eight months later. The FARC had promised to hand
   over the boy together with his mother and Ms González in December. But
   the mission was scrapped when it was discovered that the child had
   been living all along in foster care in Bogotá. Mother and son have
   now been reunited.

   The release of the two hostages was aimed at scoring a propaganda
   victory for Mr Chávez, who is regarded by the rebels as a kindred
   spirit. At the same time, evidence of the harsh conditions in the
   FARC's jungle prisons is designed to turn up the pressure on President
   Álvaro Uribe to secure the release of the 44 remaining high-profile
   hostages--including Ingrid Betancourt, a former presidential candidate
   with dual French-Colombian citizenship, and three American defence
   contractors--in exchange for hundreds of guerrillas jailed by Mr
   Uribe's government.

   However, Mr Chávez has already upped the ante, appealing to Colombia,
   other Latin American countries and Europe to stop labelling the FARC
   as a terrorist organisation and to classify it instead as a legitimate
   insurgent group. Most government leaders promptly rejected the idea
   out of hand. Daniel Ortega, Nicaragua's president and one-time rebel
   leader, is the only one to have supported it.

   The FARC have long sought political recognition in an attempt to
   downplay their criminal element, says Michael Shifter of a
   Washington-based think-tank, Inter-American Dialogue. They finance
   themselves largely through drug-trafficking and kidnapping for ransom.
   Just three days after the release of the two women, six tourists,
   including one foreigner, were kidnapped near the Pacific town of
   Nuqui.

   Mr Uribe now appears to be trying to call the FARC's bluff. If
   political status is what they want, he says, they will have to sit
   down and engage in a fully fledged peace process to end a conflict
   that has dragged on for four decades. If and when progress is made on
   that front, then Colombia's government "would be the first to stop
   calling them terrorists," he said.

   Proof of their continuing "terrorist" status could be found in the
   letters and photographs of eight of the remaining hostages, sent with
   the released women, Mr Uribe suggested. In a letter to his family,
   Luis Mendieta, a Colombian police officer, who has been held for
   nearly ten years, said his legs had become partially paralysed. "It's
   neither the physical pain nor the chains around my neck that torment
   me," he wrote. "It's the mental anguish."

   Although Mr Uribe may not like it, any deal with the FARC will almost
   certainly have to involve Mr Chávez despite the souring of relations
   between the two men. Last August Mr Uribe invited Mr Chávez to help
   broker a deal with the rebels, only to revoke his decision three
   months later. But when in December the FARC offered to free the two
   women into the hands of the Venezuelan leader, Mr Uribe grudgingly
   accepted. Mr Chávez now accuses Mr Uribe of being uninterested in
   peace, prompting Colombia's foreign minister to demand that the
   Venezuelan leader "cease his political aggression" toward Colombia.

   Nicolas Sarkozy, the French president, who has made the release of Mrs
   Betancourt a priority, certainly feels it best to continue to curry
   favour with both men. In separate letters to them, he congratulated Mr
   Uribe for taking "courageous decisions" over the hostages, while
   praising Mr Chávez for his "imaginative and tenacious diplomatic
   action" in securing the release of the women.

   Despite continued tensions between the two presidents, Colombia is
   likely to be seeing rather more of Mr Chávez's imaginative diplomacy.

