
                                                                      AFP

                                    AFP

   Colombians reckon that Álvaro Uribe saved their country. It's a pity
   for them that so many outsiders don't see their president that way


   WHEN hundreds of thousands of Colombians poured into the streets on
   July 5th to protest at the killing of 11 hostages who had been held by
   the guerrillas of the Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia (FARC),
   President Álvaro Uribe chose to read this as support for his tough
   security policies. "This demonstration is notice to the international
   community that we cannot, in this hour of pain, give in to the
   criminals," he said. But much of the "international community" no
   longer sees events in Colombia in the way most Colombians do.

   At home Mr Uribe is seen as the saviour of a country that was in
   danger of being turned into a failed state by the rampaging violence
   of drug-traffickers, left-wing guerrillas and right-wing
   paramilitaries. Since he took office in 2002, violence has fallen
   sharply. As confidence returns, the economy is growing at 8% a year.
   According to Invamer-Gallup, a pollster, Mr Uribe's approval rating
   has remained steady at between 70% and 80% over the past year.

   That is despite recent scandals in which a dozen legislators who
   support him, as well as a former intelligence chief, have been
   arrested on suspicion of having ties to the murderous paramilitaries;
   the latest to face investigation is Mario Uribe, a senator and the
   president's cousin. In the United States and Europe, on the other
   hand, Mr Uribe's reputation has suffered--so much so that in April Al
   Gore, America's former vice-president, refused to appear at the same
   conference as Mr Uribe in Miami.

   Reactions to the killing of the hostages highlighted the widening gulf
   between the perceptions of Colombians and those of the outside world.
   The hostages were regional legislators who had been held by the FARC
   for five years. According to the guerrillas they died when an
   "unidentified military group" attacked the jungle camp where they were
   being held. Mr Uribe said that there were no government operations on
   the day in question in the area where officials believe the hostages
   were held.

   The governments of France, Spain and Switzerland have been trying to
   broker an agreement under which the FARC would swap its well-known
   hostages, who include three American contractors and Ingrid
   Betancourt, a politician who holds dual French and Colombian
   nationality (hundreds more hostages are being held for ransom). Mr
   Uribe freed scores of guerrilla prisoners. But the FARC insists on the
   creation of a "demilitarised zone" in which talks should take place.
   For Colombians, that brings back bad memories of failed peace talks
   from 1999-2002 in which the FARC used a similar zone for recruitment
   and criminal activity. Mr Uribe refuses to go down that route again.

   After the killing of the 11 hostages, the three European governments
   condemned hostage-taking. But they also called for an international
   inquiry into the deaths and urged the government not to use force to
   rescue captives. Boosted by the demonstrations, Mr Uribe said he could
   not accept "statements...that measure the FARC and the government by
   the same yardstick". Few things rile him more than having his
   democratic and human-rights credentials questioned internationally.

   Yet that is happening more and more. At the end of June the Democratic
   leadership in America's House of Representatives announced that it
   would oppose ratification of a free-trade agreement with Colombia
   until it could see "concrete evidence of sustained results" on
   reducing violence, on punishing the killings of trade unionists and on
   prosecuting politicians with links to paramilitaries.

   The Democrats did not set any precise benchmarks. But Mr Uribe is in
   no position to ignore such views. Since 1999 Colombia has received
   some $5 billion in mainly military aid from America under a plan to
   fight drug-trafficking and rebel groups of left and right. Until
   recently, this enjoyed bipartisan support in Washington. Last month,
   however, the House of Representatives cut the aid by $60m (to $530m)
   and earmarked more of the money for social and justice programmes
   (some of these changes may be reversed by the Senate).

   All this exasperates Colombia. Mr Uribe points out that when his
   country was suffering its worst violence, America was unwavering in
   its support. That policy has now paid dividends: under Mr Uribe the
   guerrillas have been pushed back to remote areas and some 30,000
   paramilitaries have demobilised. In the eyes of Colombian officials,
   the aid cut and trade snub in Washington therefore look like a case of
   punishing success. As for the revelations about paramilitary
   infiltration of politics, the officials argue that these have come to
   light only because of the climate of greater security in the country.
   And although some of the president's supporters have been found to
   have had links with the paramilitaries, there is no evidence that Mr
   Uribe himself knew of them.

   José Obdulio Gaviria, an adviser to Mr Uribe, says Colombia's
   government will have to keep repeating its message over and over until
   it gets through, just as if it were dealing with "slow students". To
   some degree, however, the problem is not so much the message as the
   messenger. In Washington Mr Uribe is paying the price for his
   high-handed manner, seemingly dodgy friendships and, above all, for
   having been an enthusiastic ally of George Bush. And even if
   Colombia's message does at last get through to Washington's "slow
   students", the trade agreement may still fall victim to the Democrats'
   general lack of enthusiasm for free trade.

   Mr Uribe says he cannot allow Colombia to be treated as a "servant" of
   the United States. But he has little choice. Outsiders might treat him
   with more respect if he threatened to legalise cocaine or cosy up to
   Hugo Chávez, Venezuela's oil-rich anti-American leader. But the
   latter, at least, might irritate Colombians too.

