
   Fidel Castro's apparent recovery points to a gradual transition in
   Cuba. That may suit the United States

                                                                  Reuters

                                  Reuters

   AS WITH Mark Twain's, reports of Fidel Castro's death turn out to have
   been an exaggeration. The first photos of the Cuban leader after what
   was officially said to be an operation for severe intestinal bleeding
   showed a pallid and tired figure, dressed not in the habitual
   olive-green uniform but in natty casual clothes. Soon came more
   pictures, and then television footage, of Mr Castro lying in bed,
   talking with his brother, Raúl, and Venezuela's president, Hugo
   Chávez, who dropped in on August 13th to celebrate his friend's 80th
   birthday.

   So to the chagrin of Cubans in Miami, and to the relief of some,
   perhaps many, of those on the island, it seems that Mr Castro will be
   around for a few more months or even years. But he is clearly a sick
   man, and that raises many questions about Cuba's political
   future--questions that are being asked on both sides of the Florida
   Strait.

   Before his operation, Mr Castro "temporarily" handed over his powers
   as president, as Communist Party first secretary and as
   commander-in-chief of the army to Raúl. But his brother is only five
   years his junior and has insisted that only the collective leadership
   of the party can succeed Fidel, who has assigned some of his
   day-to-day responsibilities to six other officials.

   Raúl has certainly not rushed to grab the limelight. For almost a
   fortnight after the announcement of the handover he did not appear in
   public at all. When he did, it was to greet Mr Chávez at the airport.
   Significantly, he was accompanied by Carlos Lage, the de facto prime
   minister, who has been given the extra job of overseeing Fidel's pet
   project of overhauling Cuba's failing electricity system.

   Mr Lage is liked by many Cubans and seen as a moderate. He helped save
   the economy from total collapse in the early 1990s by overseeing
   reforms, such as allowing the creation of farmers' markets and family
   businesses, and permitting the use of the American dollar. He is
   increasingly sent abroad to represent the government on diplomatic
   missions. An elegant figure in a dark suit, he presents a rather more
   modern face of Cuba's leadership than the uniformed Castro brothers.

   It is not hard to imagine Raúl Castro and Mr Lage pushing Cuba towards
   a Chinese model of market opening with continued one-party rule. But
   others may oppose this. The collective leadership also includes three
   veteran hardliners--and two influential younger men.

   The youngest is Felipe Pérez Roque, the foreign minister, who spent
   seven years as Fidel Castro's personal assistant. Francisco Soberón,
   the unassuming president of the central bank, has helped to implement
   Fidel's decision to reverse many of the economic reforms, reining in
   the use of the dollar and family businesses. The two are leading
   figures in what Fidel has called "the battle of ideas"--his strenuous
   efforts to make sure that Cuban communism does not die with him. Also
   influential is Ricardo Alarcón, the president of the National
   Assembly, who is seen by some Cuba-watchers as a moderate.

   Fidel Castro's original statement referred to his need for "several
   weeks of rest". If he makes a full recovery, the collective leaders
   will presumably shrink back under his shadow. But it is likelier that
   a new period has begun in which Mr Castro remains the elder statesman
   while the leading group runs the country. "Revolutionaries never
   retire," Fidel has often said. But they can be kicked upstairs.

   Ordinary Cubans have remained calm through all this. During almost
   half a century of Fidel's iron control, they have learned the value of
   caution. Everything suggests a strong desire for change tempered only
   by fear of it. Almost three out of four Cubans cannot remember any
   other leader. That, and Mr Castro's apparent recovery so far, would
   seem to suggest that any change might be gradual.

   Stifled cheers in Florida

   Oddly enough, a gradual transition in Cuba may be welcome to the
   United States too--no matter what the Bush administration may say in
   public. The Americans have spent much of the past half century trying
   to overthrow or kill Mr Castro. When the news of his illness broke, it
   was greeted in south Florida, home to some 800,000 people of Cuban
   descent, with pot-banging and horn-honking. But the celebration was
   brief, and less exuberant than some had expected.

   That is partly because the exile community is not what it was. "The
   passion is gone," says Antonio Zamora, a veteran of the Bay of Pigs,
   the CIA's failed invasion of 1961. Most of the 20,000 immigrants from
   Cuba who arrive in the United States each year do so for economic, not
   political reasons. They do not plan to go back.

   But American policy towards Cuba was long ago set in stone by pressure
   from the exiles. The trade embargo, first imposed in 1962, was
   tightened by the Helms-Burton Act of 1996, which threatens foreigners
   with lawsuits if they do business on the island involving property
   confiscated from Americans. It also precludes the president (but not
   Congress) from lifting the embargo while either Fidel or Raúl Castro
   remains in power.

   George Bush, who owed his first term to his narrow win in Florida, has
   stepped up the propaganda war against the Cuban government. By
   restricting family visits, he reduced the flow of remittances--and
   curtailed communication between Florida and the island. In 2003, he
   set up a Cuba transition commission with an office at the State
   Department. Its purpose is to work for democracy and capitalism, and
   to thwart a communist succession. In a report last month, the
   commission called for $80m to be spent over the next two years on
   supporting "Cuban civil society" and breaking the regime's
   "information blockade". This month, the administration stepped up
   broadcasts by TV Martí, which beams anti-Castro propaganda.

   Some American officials have long forecast the rapid crumbling of the
   Cuban regime once Fidel is no longer in charge. That is what the
   harder-line Cuban-Americans yearn for. "They don't want a slow
   transition. They want chaos, and out of chaos they hope a democratic
   transition will come," says an aide to a congressman from Florida.
   Some exiles talk of sailing to Cuba to help dissidents on the island
   mount a civil-disobedience campaign. "We are preparing our boats and
   planes," says Ramón Saúl Sánchez, leader of the Democracy Movement,
   which has sent regular protest flotillas to the Cuban coast. The
   American authorities say they will block attempts to sail to Cuba.

   For all its aggressive talk of a "free Cuba", the administration's
   approach to Mr Castro's illness has been to await developments, notes
   Phil Peters of the Lexington Institute, a think-tank in Virginia. He
   argues that Cuba policy has subtly softened. Rather than actively
   seeking regime change, the emphasis now is on urging Cuban-Americans
   to unite and be patient. "I think people need to keep their emotions
   in check," says Mel Martinez, a Cuban-American senator close to Mr
   Bush.

   The president himself met Cuban-American leaders in Miami as news
   broke of Mr Castro's operation. He said later that the exiles would
   have to wait for Cubans on the island to decide their form of
   government before they could "redress" the issue of property
   confiscated by Mr Castro's regime. This question divides Cubans from
   Cuban-Americans, who claim that their seized assets on the island were
   worth $9 billion. "No issue will be more fraught with difficulty and
   complexity," says the transition report.

   Though Helms-Burton mainly targets commercial property, many Cubans
   live in houses once owned by others. The report says the United States
   will not support any "arbitrary effort" to evict Cubans from their
   homes. Many, but not all, Cuban-Americans accept that they will not
   recover their property. But many will doubtless push for compensation.

   What the Bush administration most fears is turmoil in Cuba that sparks
   a mass exodus. Stability may count for more than democracy--even if
   that means a smooth succession from Fidel to Raúl, though no one will
   say this in public. In a sign that it expects no immediate changes,
   the United States has tweaked its visa programme for Cubans, giving
   greater priority to family reunification and extending it to Cuban
   doctors working abroad.

   Changes of leadership in opaque, authoritarian regimes are
   unpredictable--and in Cuba's case especially so given the length of Mr
   Castro's rule. Nobody can disagree that it is for Cubans to decide
   their own fate. The question now is whether they can do so freely, and
   in peace.

