
                                                             Getty Images

                                Getty Images

   Venezuelans have seen the future--and many of them realise that it
   doesn't work


   ON REFERENDUM night, December 2nd, a giant, inflatable Chávez doll lay
   face-down and semi-deflated on a Caracas street. Nothing better summed
   up the moment. As workers dismantled the stage that was to serve as
   the scene of his triumph, letting the air out of the doll, Hugo Chávez
   was grappling with how to respond to his first-ever defeat at the
   polls.

   Were Venezuela the dictatorship that some of his more radical
   opponents claim, its people might have spent the night toppling bronze
   statues of the Leader as he fled the country. Were it a parliamentary
   democracy, the government would surely have resigned. As it is, Mr
   Chávez still has the chance to pump some air back into his project and
   serve out the remainder of his presidency--which now must end in early
   2013. But there is no doubt that his plan to install what he calls
   "21st century socialism" in what was once, in the 1970s, the richest
   country in Latin America has been badly punctured. And that setback
   may also take much of the momentum out of his industrious efforts to
   form a regional block of allies and client states.

   Voters had been asked for a yes or no on changes to 69 of the 350
   articles in the 1999 constitution. Their effect would have been to
   concentrate almost all power in an already top-heavy executive. The
   pluralism enshrined in the current constitution would have been
   replaced with obligatory "socialism". And two decades of
   decentralisation would have been reversed: elected state governors and
   mayors would have been eclipsed by an unelected "popular power"
   dependent on the presidency.

   On any reasonable interpretation of the 1999 constitution (itself
   drafted and promoted by the chavistas), such fundamental changes
   should have been submitted to a separately elected assembly. Instead,
   Mr Chávez had them drafted in secret and rubber-stamped by a
   parliament which, thanks to the opposition's boycott of the election
   in 2005, is overwhelmingly composed of his unconditional supporters.

   But by a tiny majority, of around 1.4% according to the official
   figures, Venezuelans said no. Many supporters of the president stayed
   at home. Only a year ago he had won a new six-year term with 7.3m
   votes or 63% of the total; by contrast, only 4.4m voted yes in the
   referendum.

   It is a result that redraws Venezuela's political map. Hitherto, the
   president has been blessed with an incompetent opposition, tainted by
   the failures of the 1980s and 1990s, when low oil prices pushed many
   Venezuelans into poverty. Having sought to overthrow Mr Chávez, first
   in an abortive coup and then through a general strike-cum-lock-out,
   many of the opposition's leaders were too easily dismissed as spoiled
   "oligarchs".

   But since his re-election last year, Mr Chávez has overreached himself
   and provoked some more dangerous opponents. His first mistake came
   last January, when he summoned the four parties in his coalition and
   ordered them to merge into a single Venezuelan United Socialist Party
   (PSUV), loosely modelled on Cuba's Communist Party. Podemos, a
   social-democratic party, and two other smaller groups refused. Then,
   in May, Mr Chávez decided not to renew the broadcasting licence of the
   main opposition television channel, ostensibly because it had
   supported the 2002 coup attempt. This was unpopular with ordinary
   Venezuelans and was opposed by a new and energetic student movement,
   which went on to take the lead in the No campaign.

   The president's drive to turn the armed forces into a tool of his
   socialist project aroused the weighty opposition of General Raúl
   Isaías Baduel, who stepped down as defence minister in July and who is
   a hero to the chavista grassroots for his role in restoring Mr Chávez
   after the 2002 coup. Installed in a sleek glass office block in
   Caracas, General Baduel, a man as serene as the president is
   intemperate, has spent the past few weeks telling Venezuelans that the
   proposed reform amounted to another coup.

   On top of that, many chavista politicians were unenthusiastic, since
   the reform would have let Mr Chávez run indefinitely for president but
   banned re-election for other posts. The chavista movement suffered "a
   top-to-bottom split, from state governors down to the grassroots",
   said Ismael García, the leader of Podemos.

   The emergence of what Mr García calls a "third pole" between the
   government and the traditional opposition allowed many of the
   president's supporters to vote no, or at least to abstain, without
   feeling that they were betraying their leader. The students did much
   of the hard work of bringing out voters and watching over ballot
   boxes. And when it seemed that Mr Chávez might be tempted to claim
   victory, General Baduel played a key role, with an--at least
   implicit--threat to reject such a result and split the armed forces.

   The economy boils over

   It is not hard to see what lies behind the decision of many chavistas
   not to vote. Their continuing loyalty to their comandante is being
   eroded by mounting economic distortions and the corruption and
   incompetence of his government.

   It was Mr Chávez's good fortune to preside over a massive increase in
   the oil price (to which he made a modest contribution by cancelling
   plans under which private investment would have doubled Venezuela's
   oil output). The result has been a wild economic boom (see chart 1).
   This has prompted a sharp drop in the number of Venezuelans living in
   poverty, from 43% in 1999 to 27.5% earlier this year, according to
   government figures. Hundreds of thousands of new cars have turned
   Caracas into an all-day traffic jam.

   The boom has been fuelled mainly by public spending, which has risen
   from around 20% of GDP in the late 1990s to some 38% last year
   (including several off-budget funds controlled by the president). It
   has been amplified by expansionary fiscal and monetary policies. To
   check inflation, the official exchange rate has been pegged at 2,150
   bolívares to the dollar. That has been possible hitherto because
   revenues from oil exports have risen dramatically, from $17 billion in
   1999 to $58 billion last year.

   The result is known to economists as Dutch disease: an overvalued
   exchange rate favours imports but makes life hard for manufacturers
   and farmers. In Venezuela's case this has been exacerbated by Mr
   Chávez's ideological hostility to the private sector, which has
   involved selective nationalisation and intermittent threats to private
   property. While many private companies (and banks) have done well out
   of the boom, they have been loth to make long-term investments.
   Imports have risen fourfold over the past four years, while GDP has
   expanded by only half over the same period.

   José Manuel Puente, an economist at IESA, a business school in
   Caracas, sees four warning lights for the economy: oil output,
   inflation, fiscal problems and a growing shortage of dollars. Since Mr
   Chávez took direct control of PDVSA, the state oil company, after the
   crippling strike of 2002-03, production of crude has declined. That is
   partly because PDVSA has slashed investment in order to pay for social
   programmes, and partly because its payroll has doubled to 90,000 in
   the past four years. The government's policy of maximising its share
   of oil revenues by obliging foreign companies to become minority
   partners in joint ventures appears to have intensified the trend. Oil
   output has fallen for six consecutive quarters, according to the
   Central Bank. Although officials still insist that oil production is
   3.3m barrels per day (b/d), even OPEC, of which Venezuela is a founder
   member, does not believe this: in October it slashed Venezuela's
   production quota to 2.5m b/d.

   The second warning light is inflation (see chart 2). In November
   prices rose by 4.4%, the highest monthly figure for four years, taking
   the annual rate to 21%, the highest in Latin America. Food prices have
   risen even faster, by 29%--despite price controls. Because of those
   controls, staples such as milk, eggs, black beans and cooking oil are
   in such short supply that shoppers sometimes fight for them.

   To try to slow inflation the government slashed VAT earlier this year,
   from 14% to 9%. To plug the resulting fiscal gap, in November it
   imposed a tax on financial transactions--one reason for that month's
   spike in inflation. Another clear sign of strain is a surge in the
   parallel-market price of the dollar. Even if oil prices remain at
   current levels, many economists believe the government will have to
   devalue and start to cool the economy early next year.

   The frustrations of collectivism

   That will strain political loyalty further. After nine years of the
   Bolivarian revolution (named after Símon Bolívar, the South American
   independence hero) Venezuelans are becoming increasingly disillusioned
   with its corrupt inefficiency. Look behind the ubiquitous billboards
   proclaiming the government's social projects, and everywhere the
   failures and frustrations are palpable.

   Take, for example, a model collective farm near the village of Buenos
   Aires in the coastal plain of Barlovento, an area with a large black
   population east of Caracas. Set up in 2002, it looks like a neat
   suburban estate, its one-storey houses for 144 families grouped in 12
   circular cul-de-sacs. Three tractors, from China and Iran, are parked
   nearby. But farming the project's 108 hectares (267 acres) "did not go
   as we wanted", says Jacobo Pacheco, one of the community's leaders,
   with quiet understatement.

   Mr Pacheco, who is 62 and whose red beret has an image of Che Guevara,
   says he continues to support Mr Chávez. But he paints a devastating
   picture of government mismanagement. Agronomists from the National
   Lands Institute (INTI), which is responsible for the project, advised
   the collective's farmers to plant half a dozen different fruits; all
   but the lemons failed, either because the land was unsuitable or
   because of defects in the irrigation system. The water supply to the
   houses has been cut off because a pump doesn't work. None of six
   promised workshops, providing training and employment in carpentry,
   metalworking and the like, has been built. The local branch of Mercal,
   the government's subsidised supermarket chain, has been closed for the
   past year.

   The farm's members have to take outside work to make ends meet. Mr
   Pacheco says that collective farming doesn't suit Venezuelans. He
   wants INTI to divide the land into individual plots. He has other
   grievances, too. When invited to an exhibition about the project at
   the presidential palace he saw pictures and plans of the houses,
   showing that they should have been equipped to a higher standard. He
   has seen receipts for the household equipment and says that between
   them the officials and supplier involved pocketed 1 billion bolívares
   ($465,000).

   This story rings true. Many government projects are either
   misconceived, or unfinished, or both--like the gleaming new
   fish-processing plant along the coast at Boca de Uchire that has stood
   empty for a year because a planned wharf remains on the drawing board,
   while just three carpenters work on the beach building the fishing
   fleet designed to supply it. Two out of three of the Mercal branches
   in Caracas have closed, reckons Jésus Torrealba, a former opposition
   activist who now runs a radio programme on the problems of the poor
   barrios.

   Officials point with pride to the Cuban-designed social programmes
   known as misiones implemented by Mr Chávez when oil revenues picked up
   in 2003. Certainly, a primary-health programme called Barrio Adentro,
   which is mainly staffed by Cuban doctors and dentists, seems to work
   well, and is valued by residents in poorer neighbourhoods. Yet such
   evaluations as exist of these programmes suggest they have had little
   overall impact.

                                                                       AP

                                     AP

               Oil at record prices, but food in short supply

   Mr Chávez declared in 2005 that thanks to Misión Robinson, a scheme to
   teach adults to read and write, Venezuela had eradicated illiteracy, a
   boast quickly parroted by UNESCO officials. But the government was
   later forced to withdraw the claim after its own surveys suggested
   that over 1m adults are still illiterate. Perhaps the most successful
   educational policy has been one to extend the school day and provide
   meals. This was devised by a previous government, though to his credit
   Mr Chávez implemented it.

   Despite the apparent success of Barrio Adentro, a recent decline in
   infant mortality merely mimics the historical trend in Venezuela,
   according to a study by Francisco Rodríguez, chief economist at the
   National Assembly from 2000-04 and now at Wesleyan University in
   Connecticut. The incidence of stunting and malnutrition in children
   has even slightly increased, from 8.4 per thousand in 1999 to 9.1 in
   2006 according to government data. That points to the deterioration of
   public hospitals under Mr Chávez.

   Strip away the propaganda, and the government's socio-economic
   policies do not particularly favour the poor. Much of the extra public
   spending has gone on arms purchases, bureaucracy (public employment
   has doubled) and infrastructure (some of it useful, to be sure).

   The government also spends money on indiscriminate subsidies. These
   mean, for example, that a tank of petrol costs less than $2, and that
   all credit-card holders get a quota of cheap dollars. Such policies
   favour the better off--including the new chavista elite of military
   officers, political leaders and favoured businessmen. According to the
   Central Bank, the distribution of income has become less equal under
   Mr Chávez. The Gini coefficient, a standard measure of inequality, has
   risen from 44.1 in 2000 to 48 in 2005. Over the same period, income
   distribution has become more equal in Brazil, Mexico and Chile.

   A different landscape

   Margarita López Maya, a social scientist at the Central University of
   Venezuela, points to the Bolivarian revolution's success in bringing
   the poor into politics and giving them a sense of citizenship, partly
   through a network of neighbourhood councils. Had the constitutional
   reform been approved, this would have been jeopardised, she says,
   since the councils would have depended directly on the president and
   his largesse.

   That sense of inclusion remains Mr Chávez's prime political asset. He
   still controls almost all the country's institutions, has billions of
   dollars to spend at will, and for the next nine months--thanks to an
   enabling law--can rule by decree over wide swathes of national life.
   He is a man whose political skills have frequently been
   underestimated, and who could yet bounce back from defeat.

   After his reverse, Mr Chávez insisted that his project had not been
   derailed, merely shunted into a siding "for now". That was a
   deliberate echo of the phrase he used after leading a failed military
   coup in 1992; seven years later, he was president. Maybe the country
   was not yet "ripe" for socialism, but "there will be no step back", he
   said. "You should know that I am not withdrawing a single comma of
   this proposal." He promised to reintroduce some bits of the reform by
   other means.

   Nevertheless, the referendum marks a watershed. Mr Chávez "has been
   winged--he's passed his peak," says Teodoro Petkoff, a centrist
   opposition leader and newspaper editor. For the first time in nearly a
   decade it is possible for Venezuelans to envisage life after Mr
   Chávez.

   The opposition victory, and the admission of defeat by the president,
   ought to convince radicals on both sides that the only solution to the
   country's bitter political polarisation is peaceful and electoral. The
   emergence of the "third pole", composed of Podemos, General Baduel and
   the student movement, should in itself herald a less polarised
   politics. Some talk of calling a constituent assembly to claw power
   back from the president. Others are looking ahead to elections for
   mayors and governors next year.

   The referendum defeat means Mr Chávez cannot legally run again for the
   presidency. His aura of invincibility has gone, and the battle for the
   succession seems bound to begin soon. In the ruling party, political
   survival no longer demands unquestioning loyalty to the comandante.
   Fractures have already begun to appear in the supreme court and the
   parliament.

   "This is not a 100-metre sprint, it's a marathon," cautions Mr
   Petkoff. But its direction is clear. "Venezuelans have woken up" is a
   phrase often used by supporters of Mr Chávez to describe the political
   mobilisation of the poor. The referendum suggests that many of them
   are waking up to the shortcomings of his revolution.

