
   Two presidents seek a hostage deal

                                                                       AP
                                                                       AP

                               The Betancourts have the ear of the Elysée


   FOR most of his nearly five years as Colombia's president, Álvaro
   Uribe has rejected any deal with the FARC guerrillas for a prisoner
   swap to secure the release of some 60 prominent hostages. So why has
   he suddenly freed nearly 200 FARC prisoners, including Rodrigo Granda,
   one of its leaders?

   Colombians, most of whom support Mr Uribe's tough security policies,
   are baffled. The FARC called the move a "farce". Even more farcically,
   Mr Granda protested against his own release. The FARC insists that it
   will free its hostages, who include Ingrid Betancourt, a former
   presidential candidate seized in 2002, only after a negotiation to be
   held in an area from which the government would withdraw its troops.
   Though Mr Uribe has sometimes wavered on this, he again rejected it
   this week.

   The explanation for Mr Uribe's behaviour probably lies in his
   desperate need for friends abroad. Though he has made Colombia much
   safer, the Democrats who control the United States' Congress criticise
   his government's human-rights record. The president arrived in
   Washington, DC, on June 6th for his second lobbying trip in a month.
   Earlier, a congressional sub-committee voted to cut proposed aid to
   Colombia of some $700m by 10% and shift much of it from military to
   social programmes. The Democrats are also refusing to ratify a
   free-trade agreement with Colombia.

   Mr Uribe's opponents say the prisoner release is to pave the way for a
   controversial proposal to free a dozen pro-government legislators
   jailed on suspicion of links with right-wing paramilitaries. But Mr
   Uribe said he had freed Mr Granda, whose seizure in Venezuela three
   years ago caused a diplomatic row, at the request of Nicolas Sarkozy,
   France's new president.

   Mr Sarkozy's office said that he hoped that Mr Granda's release could
   help free the hostages. Ms Betancourt is a minor figure in Colombia
   but an iconic one in France, where she studied. She has dual
   citizenship and two French children. A vast portrait of her hangs from
   the façade of Paris's town hall. When foreign minister in 2003,
   Dominique de Villepin, her former professor, sent a crack team to
   rescue her; their mission was embarrassingly aborted in Brazil.

   Since his election, Mr Sarkozy has taken up her case with vigour,
   twice inviting her children to the Elysée Palace. Liberating Ms
   Betancourt would be a spectacular political coup for a president whose
   action-man style marks a break with the era of Jacques Chirac and who
   faces two-round legislative elections on June 10th and 17th.

   At what price, though? French diplomats insist they merely want to
   "facilitate" a "humanitarian exchange", and that they are not
   negotiating directly with the FARC, which is listed by Europe and the
   United States as a terrorist organisation. "We do not consider that we
   are breaching our principles," said one diplomat. That may not impress
   Colombians, who watched as the FARC kidnapped a police commander and
   two others this week.

