
   A popular president deadlocked by a determined opposition

                                                                  Reuters
                                                                  Reuters

                                Morales, all dressed-up but going nowhere


   DEADLINES have come and gone but after 15 months of deliberations an
   elected Constituent Assembly seems nowhere near agreeing the text of a
   new constitution for Bolivia. That is a matter of growing frustration
   for the supporters of President Evo Morales, who set up the assembly.
   He promised that the new constitution would enshrine the rights of
   Bolivians of Andean Indian descent to land and autonomy, and uphold a
   socialist economy with state control over national resources.

   But the assembly has become deadlocked, reflecting Bolivia's political
   divide. Although the mountainous and mainly-Indian west is solidly
   behind Mr Morales, the commercially-minded, whiter lowland east is
   bitterly opposed to him. The president's supporters in the Movement to
   Socialism (MAS) have a majority, but not the two-thirds required to
   impose their text. So the opposition has been able to stall the
   assembly.

   Behind all the constitutional verbiage the main dispute is over money.
   Bolivia's natural-gas deposits are in the opposition-controlled east.
   The opposition wants the new constitution to uphold regional autonomy
   and guarantee its regional governments a large chunk of gas royalties.
   Indigenous leaders want similar autonomy, but the government wants to
   secure greater central control of gas revenues.

   Last month similar tensions surfaced in a dispute over whether
   airports should be run locally or from the centre. This culminated in
   Mr Morales sending the army to secure the country's busiest airport,
   in the eastern city of Santa Cruz. When that triggered mass protests
   in the city, the president backed down.

   Mr Morales then promptly announced a big cut in transfers of gas
   revenues to regional governments in order to pay--and increase by a
   third--an annuity received by all Bolivians aged over 60. This was
   originally paid, only to those over 65, out of the dividends from the
   government's shares in privatised hydrocarbons companies. But Mr
   Morales transferred these shares to the revived state oil company as
   part of his scheme to renationalise the industry. The increase in the
   annuity is popular: indeed, the president led a celebratory march by
   pensioners through Santa Cruz.

   The new constitution has also become hostage to an unexpected source
   of opposition. The assembly sits in Sucre, a small central city which
   is the seat of the judiciary and was the capital until displaced by La
   Paz more than a century ago. Sucre wants its status restored. Ugly
   protests in the city prompted the assembly in September to suspend its
   public sessions. The government is seeking alternative venues.

   Despite his radical talk, Mr Morales has a pragmatic streak derived
   from his years as leader of a trade union of coca workers. His
   vice-president, Álvaro García Linera, spent October negotiating
   tentative agreements with the opposition on the autonomy question and
   on the constitution's economic chapters. On paper, it is not hard to
   see a compromise in which the opposition accepts Mr Morales's desire
   to be allowed to run for a second consecutive term in return for
   guarantees of regional autonomy and a deal on money.

   But the opposition remains suspicious of Mr Morales's intentions. Its
   leaders are alarmed by his close friendship with Venezuela's socialist
   president, Hugo Chávez. Venezuela has become a big aid donor.
   Venezuelan lawyers are reported to be drafting government decrees.
   According to television pictures broadcast by an opposition station,
   the troops who took over Santa Cruz airport included at least two in
   Venezuelan uniforms.

   The latest deadline for the assembly to agree the constitutional text
   is December 14th. Few involved on either side will bet on agreement
   being reached. But Mr Morales remains popular: polls suggest he has
   the support of at least 60% of Bolivians. One way or another he seems
   likely to get his way--or most of it--in the end.

