
   Why Brazil is better placed than it used to be to cope with a world
   slowdown

                                                           Agencia Estado

                               Agencia Estado

   BRAZILIANS know about economic and financial crises. The squalls
   afflicting America and threatening Europe look like a gentle breeze
   when compared with the frequent and violent blow-ups that litter
   Brazil's economic history. Much of the problem has been Brazil's
   vulnerability to shocks imported from around the rest of the globe. So
   what might happen if the economies in the rich world stumble again
   this year?

   Recent precedents do not look good. Since the introduction of a new
   currency, the real, in 1994, which serves as the year zero for
   economic policy, growth has picked up to a reasonable rate three
   times. Each time, points out Eduardo Giannetti da Fonseca, an
   economist, people have speculated that Brazil was at last on the road
   to a bright new future. And each time something has come along to
   puncture this optimism: in 1998 it was the Asian financial crisis, in
   2001 Argentina's bond default and in 2005 a rapid rise in inflation.

   Now bullishness is abundant once again. The economy grew at an
   estimated annualised rate of 6% in the final quarter of last year
   (which is probably too fast). The Bovespa, Brazil's stockmarket,
   jumped by 60% in value during 2007. And yet even though recent history
   counsels caution, there are reasons to believe that the economy should
   cope better with whatever the world throws at it.

   "Brazil has never been so well placed to face a downturn," says
   Mailson da Nobrega, finance minister from 1988 to 1990, a period that
   coincided with an inflation crisis. He now works for Tendencias, a
   consultancy. Arminio Fraga, who was in charge of the central bank
   during the Argentine collapse and the bond market's swoon at the
   prospect of Luiz Inácio Lula da Silva's election as president,
   cautiously agrees. "A lot has been driven by favourable winds," says
   Mr Fraga, who now runs Gavea, an investment fund. "If they stop then
   we are not in a position to blow up, but it won't be irrelevant."

   What changed? First, domestic demand is strong. Brazil's headline real
   interest rate is just below 7% which, as Alexandre Bassoli of HSBC
   bank points out, would tip most countries into recession, but is low
   by Brazilian standards. The result has been a flowering of credit,
   which helped domestic demand grow by an annualised rate of almost 7%
   in the third quarter. It would take a sharp rise in rates to kill this
   off, and that looks unlikely.

   Second, Brazil is fairly well integrated into world markets. It is not
   overly dependent on America, which accounts for less than a fifth of
   exports. The remaining four-fifths are reasonably well spread between
   Europe, Asia and the rest of Latin America. Admittedly, most of what
   Brazil produces for foreign consumption is in the form of primary
   goods (from orange juice to footballers), which means that export
   growth correlates strongly with commodity prices. But exports are not
   made up of any single commodity (unlike oil-rich Venezuela's, for
   example). "Even if China buys less Brazilian iron ore, the hope is
   that Chinese people will keep eating Brazilian protein," says Jose
   Mendonca de Barros of MB Associados, a consultancy.

   Third, Brazil is less vulnerable to financial shocks than it once was.
   A large part of this is due to a combination of a central bank that
   acts independently and transparently, publishing minutes of meetings
   promptly on its website; and a floating exchange rate, adopted in
   1999. Before then, whenever the current account deteriorated, the
   central bank was forced to hike rates, killing growth.

   Brazil has retired its dollar-denominated debt, which has been a
   source of trouble in earlier financial crises. In the past, when the
   currency depreciated this debt ballooned, causing further problems.
   Now that government debt is denominated in reais, a similar move in
   the exchange rate reduces government liabilities. This was tested in
   August last year, when the real lost 11% of its value in a couple of
   weeks, and the government debt effectively shrank. Foreign direct
   investment is strong, and Brazil now holds more dollars than it owes,
   a happy development that has led to misguided suggestions of setting
   up a sovereign wealth fund.

   Even so, Brazil is clearly far from immune to what happens in the rest
   of the world. The economy also seems to be moving into a less benign
   phase. After years of big surpluses, the current account looks set to
   run a small deficit this year. Inflation, which had been falling,
   picked up toward the end of last year to give an annual inflation rate
   in December of 4.5%. That is right on the central bank's target, and
   forecasters expect inflation to increase only slightly this year. But
   markets have been wrong on this before.

   Moreover, the economy still suffers from problems that make growth
   above 5% look like a stretch. Government debt is still too high,
   Brazil invests too little, and the government takes too much for
   itself, spending it on things that do little to raise the economy's
   potential. "The easy part of growth is over," says Mr da Fonseca. But
   if Brazil is able to sustain steady growth without being blown
   off-course by events elsewhere, the country will look very different
   in ten years' time.

