
   Women's prominence in politics is not reflected in policies


   AT FIRST glance, Argentina looks almost like a matriarchy. Not only is
   Cristina Fernández the first woman to be elected as its president, but
   her nearest challenger in October's election was another woman, Elisa
   Carrió. Under a 1991 law, 30% of the candidates on party lists for
   Congress must be women, a proportion more than reflected in the
   make-up of its lower house. Argentina's best-known human-rights
   campaigners--the mothers and grandmothers of the Plaza de Mayo--have
   also been women.

   That seems like quite a change for a country long notorious for the
   machismo of gauchos and the tango, or of Carlos Menem and Diego
   Maradona. Ms Fernández makes much of her friendship with another Latin
   American woman president, Chile's Michelle Bachelet. But Ms Bachelet
   did not owe her job to a prominent husband. For Argentine women the
   best route to the political summit is still to be a Peronist wife.

   The tradition began with Eva Duarte, a jobbing actress who became the
   nation's patron saint through marriage to Juan Perón and her agitation
   for women and the poor. Perón's third wife, María Estela
   ("Isabelita"), a former nightclub dancer, briefly succeeded him as
   president during Argentina's murderous 1970s. In legislative elections
   in 2005, Ms Fernández defeated another Peronist wife, Hilda González
   de Duhalde, in a race for a Senate seat in Buenos Aires province; that
   was a proxy victory for her husband, Néstor Kirchner, against his
   predecessor and former sponsor, Eduardo Duhalde.

   But the prominence of women in politics has not led to feminist
   policies. Proposals for equal pay and abortion have got nowhere. "We
   have to implement our values," says María Eugenia Estenssoro, a
   senator. "Being a woman is not just about skirts. It's about vision."
   Demonstrating that might be one way in which Ms Fernández can show who
   is boss in the presidential palace.

