
   Mark Steyn and the thought police

   FOR much of the past century Maclean's, Canada's main newsweekly, has
   been as colourless as its name. But since early 2005, when slumping
   sales prompted a management overhaul, it has become livelier and more
   provocative. Too provocative, it seems, for some Canadians.

   One of its star attractions is Mark Steyn, a columnist who is a
   sparkling, often side-splittingly funny writer and, by his own
   admission, "a Zionist neocon Bush shill". Some readers added
   "Islamophobe" after Maclean's published an alarmist screed by Mr Steyn
   in October 2006 predicting, among other things, that Europe was
   becoming a "Eurabia" overrun by Muslim hordes, intent on jihad and
   sharia.

   The piece, an excerpt from Mr Steyn's book "America Alone: The End Of
   The World As We Know It", was notable for its simplistic demographic
   projections--Yemen (population 22m) will outnumber Russia (141m) by
   mid-century, he wrote confidently--and for the reaction it generated.
   Maclean's published 27 letters, many of complaint. That was not enough
   for some offended Muslims. Last spring a group of Toronto law students
   marched into the magazine's offices demanding equal space for a
   rebuttal by an author of their choosing. Ken Whyte, the editor and
   publisher, told the group he would rather see Maclean's go bankrupt.

   Last month the students and the Canadian Islamic Congress (CIC), a
   lobby group, filed complaints against Maclean's at the Canadian Human
   Rights Commission, as well as those of Ontario and British Columbia.
   The article, the CIC claimed, harmed Muslims' "sense of dignity and
   self-worth".

   Their choice of forum has brought protests. The criminal code has
   hate-propaganda provisions, but using these requires convincing a
   prosecutor. The bar is much lower for Human Rights Commissions and
   their tribunals. These were set up to deal with discrimination on
   grounds such as race or sex in jobs, housing or services. Even the man
   who inspired them, Alan Borovoy, a civil-liberties lawyer, is dismayed
   at their misuse to limit free speech. The tribunals can only levy
   small fines and give an order to desist. But the proceedings involve
   steep costs for defendants, whereas plaintiffs pay nothing if the
   commission decides there are grounds to proceed.

   Much of Canada's press and many broadcasters are already noted for
   politically correct blandness. Some fear that the case can only make
   that worse. Mr Steyn and others hope it will prompt a narrower brief
   for the commissions, or even their abolition. As he put it in his
   blog, "I don't want to get off the hook. I want to take the hook and
   stick it up the collective butt of these thought police."

