
   A country revamped as a service hub grows at Chinese rates

   COMMUTER traffic crawls along Avenida Balboa, the coastal road that is
   the spine of Panama City, slowed by thousands of new cars. In the
   city's wealthier districts restaurants are packed, and it is hard to
   find a street without a skyscraper under construction. While some of
   its neighbours in Central America struggle with commodity-based
   economies, Panama is busy reinventing itself as a regional logistics
   and services hub.

   That was a position it enjoyed in the 1970s, when an offshore
   financial industry briefly flourished. Then came the dark years of
   Manuel Noriega, a thuggish strongman toppled by an American invasion
   in 1989. Several undistinguished governments followed.

   Several things have now come together to produce an extraordinary boom
   in Panama. The economy will expand by 11% this year and by over 9% in
   both 2008 and 2009, according to a forecast by LatinSource, a
   consultancy. That is faster than anywhere else in Latin America.

   The first was the transfer of sovereignty over the Panama Canal in
   1999. Since then, the canal has been run as a Panamanian business,
   rather than a branch of the United States' federal bureaucracy.
   President Martín Torrijos, who took office in 2004 (and whose father,
   a military ruler, negotiated the canal handover in the 1970s), pushed
   through a referendum last year which approved a $5.2 billion plan to
   expand the canal, doubling its capacity and enabling it to take much
   bigger ships. Work is due to start in August.

   Other big projects are planned in the wake of the canal expansion.
   Occidental Petroleum, in partnership with Qatar Petroleum, plans an
   oil refinery, costing $7 billion, at Puerto Armuelles. A consortium
   led by Hutchison Whampoa, a Hong Kong company, plans to turn Balboa
   into the largest port in Latin America. China's government-owned
   shipping operator, COSCO, is competing to build a second mega-port on
   the Pacific coast--even though Panama recognises Taiwan. Copa, a local
   airline, aspires to turn Panama into an alternative regional hub for
   travellers deterred by the security hassles of Miami airport.

   The second factor is that Mr Torrijos's government has been rather
   more effective than its predecessors. He has cleaned up the public
   finances, pushing through an unpopular reform of social security. He
   actively courts foreign investors. He has negotiated a free-trade
   agreement with the United States, which Panama hopes will soon be
   ratified by the American Congress. But he also has close ties to other
   regional leaders, including Cuba's Raúl Castro.

   This week Spain's prime minister, José Luis Rodríguez Zapatero, was
   the latest foreign leader to drop by, with a coterie of businessmen in
   tow. New foreign direct investment more than doubled in 2006 compared
   with the previous year, accounting for 16% of GDP--a share that is
   twice as big as in any other country in the region, according to the
   UN Economic Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean.

   The government has finally got around to developing the prime land
   once occupied by American military bases in the former Canal Zone. The
   UN is moving its regional headquarters into one; another will become a
   technology park. Last week the government signed a contract with
   London & Regional, a British property company, which plans to build
   housing and industrial units at the former Howard Air Force base. Some
   of the new housing is aimed at American retirees, who are flocking to
   Panama. Donald Trump, an American property developer, is planning a
   68-storey hotel and resort.

   But as the developers pile in, not everyone is cheering. Some worry
   that the property bubble will soon burst. Others note that a weak
   education system does not produce enough engineers or skilled workers.
   Contractors are likely to import skilled labour from abroad. But with
   40% of Panamanians still living in poverty, and unemployment at 8.6%
   last year (though falling), that will not be popular.

   A handful of families continue to control much of the country's wealth
   and benefit from cosy ties to government while most Panamanians
   struggle to make ends meet. Mr Torrijos proposes to increase the
   minimum wage of $300 a month. American diplomats worry that if the
   benefits of growth don't filter down, the resulting sense of injustice
   could fuel political radicalisation.

   A bigger, related, worry is corruption. Foreign firms are beginning to
   complain that they are hampered by the informal links between
   government and local business oligarchs. Sam Taliaferro, an American
   who runs a property business catering to foreign retirees in Boquete,
   a hill resort, says that corruption threatens to choke off foreign
   investment. With three-dozen other investors, he has formed a group to
   campaign against what he sees as the gouging of foreign firms.

   Though Mr Torrijos's government has a cleaner record than its
   predecessors, it has not been scandal-free. An uncle of the president
   controversially acquired vacant land, and went on to destroy protected
   mangrove swamp without the necessary permit. It is hard to judge how
   deep corruption goes, or how much of an impact it may have on foreign
   investment. But if Panama's boom is to propel it swiftly to
   developed-country status over the next decade or so, it would help if
   it rested on a stronger institutional foundation.

