
   The political vendetta behind another nationalisation


   IT IS becoming a familiar ritual. On February 9th Evo Morales,
   Bolivia's socialist president, flanked by troops, stood in front of
   the Vinto tin smelter and declared it nationalised. Last May he did
   the same to his country's natural-gas industry. In October he said it
   was the turn of mining. Yet with Mr Morales, whose rallying cry is
   "Bolivian resources for the Bolivian people", sometimes the symbolism
   and the rhetoric is more ambitious than the reality.

   So it was with natural gas, where he later signed new, tougher
   contracts with multinationals. The threat to nationalise mining
   quickly changed to a proposal to raise taxes on private mining
   companies. And even that was watered down after 20,000 members of
   mining co-operatives marched on La Paz earlier this month.

   Vinto, officials claim, is a special case. "It's about righting a
   wrong," says Guillermo Dalence, the mining minister. "The plant was
   taken from the Bolivian people fraudulently and we are reclaiming it."

   The smelter has a controversial history. Built by a military
   government, it was privatised in 1999. The buyer was Allied Deals, a
   British outfit later liquidated after its directors were charged with
   fraud over an unrelated scam in the metals market.

   Allied Deals paid $27m for the smelter and the nearby Huanuni mine. In
   2002 its liquidator sold Vinto for $6m to a consortium headed by
   Comsur, a mining company owned by Gonzalo Sánchez de Lozada, Bolivia's
   president from 1993-97. Mr Sánchez de Lozada (known to Bolivians as
   Goni) was elected again in 2002, but was toppled a year later by
   protesters who included supporters of Mr Morales.

   Goni is a hate figure in Bolivia today. That is partly because 67
   people were killed when he called out the army against the protests in
   2003. The government is backing moves to extradite him from the United
   States to face a trial which the former president's lawyers say is
   politically motivated. But Goni is also hated because he oversaw the
   privatisations that Mr Morales is now trying to reverse.

   In 2005 Goni sold Comsur's Bolivian assets (which included several
   mines) to Glencore, a mining company based in Switzerland. The price
   was not disclosed, but it was said to be $220m, of which $90m was said
   to be for the smelter. According to one well-placed source, a
   side-letter required Comsur to repay Glencore in the case of
   nationalisation.

   Since the world tin price was very low when Vinto was privatised, and
   the smelter had lost money in state hands, it is far from clear that
   Bolivia was swindled. The tin price has since risen sharply, reaching
   its highest level since 1985 this week. So in addition to targeting
   Goni, the nationalisation may boost government revenues.

   Glencore is demanding compensation for the smelter. It says the
   seizure violates a 1991 bilateral investment treaty between Bolivia
   and Switzerland. The government says it, too, will seek compensation
   in any international arbitration. It claims that Glencore did not
   register the purchase in Bolivia and, somewhat improbably, that the
   smelter was worth $140m when it was privatised. "All foreign companies
   that operate within the legal framework have our guarantee that they
   won't be touched," says Mr Dalence. Investors may not be wholly
   reassured.

