
   So many more women on the beach than men

   AS ONE observes the economical use of fabric to contain flesh as it
   wiggles from one posto to the next on Rio de Janeiro's Ipanema beach,
   thoughts turn immediately to demography. Like other countries where
   the population is ageing, Brazil has more women than men. But in Rio
   the imbalance is particularly marked: for every 100 females in the
   city there are only 86.4 males, according to IBGE, the national
   statistics agency. That is far lower than the 95 males per 100 females
   that is the average for Brazil's big cities. What is going on? And
   does this explain the size of the bikinis?

   The answer lies partly in three forces that have shaped Brazil over
   the past few decades. First, like the rest of the country, Rio has
   undergone an extraordinary transition in its birthrate. Although the
   Catholic church and the government discouraged contraception for
   decades, Brazilian women decided to have fewer babies. Many opted for
   sterilisation. One study suggests up to 40% of women aged 15-49 have
   been sterilised. "You find some families where three generations of
   women have been sterilised after childbirth," says José de Carvalho, a
   demographer at the Federal University of Minas Gerais.

   As a result the fertility rate dropped from 6.2 live births per woman
   in 1960 to around two today, while people are living longer. In the
   past ten years, life expectancy has risen from 68.9 years to 72.4
   years. An older population means more women in relation to men,
   because women tend to live longer.

   Second, during the past 50 years millions of women have moved away
   from rural areas and towards cities, where they often find jobs in
   domestic service. This has further skewed the sex ratio in cities
   compared with the countryside. Copacabana, just down the beach from
   Ipanema, is one of the most imbalanced places in the whole of the
   country, thanks to a heavy concentration of the (disproportionately
   female) over-65s and their maids. The third factor is violence. Rio's
   murder rate, at 40 per 100,000 people, is shockingly high, and most of
   the victims are young men.

   Evolutionary biologists would draw a straight line between the
   declining number of potential mates, the need for female cariocas to
   go to greater lengths to win them, and those small bikinis. But that
   seems far-fetched, given that much of the imbalance is down to simple
   ageing. Rio's grannies, who are the most affected, are--by and
   large--a demure lot. The problem of the bikini is going to require
   some further study.

