
   Néstor Kirchner's unusual alliance


   THE best-defended building in the centre of Buenos Aires is not a bank
   or a barracks. It is the headquarters of AMIA, a Jewish cultural
   centre. Security guards require government-issued identification of
   all visitors, who must then pass through a pair of thick metal doors.
   The reason: in 1994 AMIA was hit by a car bomb that killed 85 people.

   Nobody has yet been convicted of the outrage. In 2003 Britain detained
   Iran's former ambassador to Buenos Aires, whom Argentina accused of
   helping the bombers. But he was released for lack of evidence (as were
   five local suspects). Last year an Argentine court formally requested
   the extradition of eight former Iranian officials.

   Argentina's Jewish community, the largest in Latin America, has found
   a somewhat unlikely ally in Néstor Kirchner, the country's left-wing
   president. His Peronist party long had an anti-Semitic streak: its
   founder, Juan Perón, blocked Jewish migration to Argentina and gave
   refuge to scores of Nazi leaders after the second world war.

   But Mr Kirchner has gone out of his way to court Argentine Jews. He
   has created a special commission to re-investigate the AMIA case. He
   meets Jewish leaders around five times a year; his wife, Cristina
   Fernández, who is expected to succeed him in the presidency after an
   election on October 28th, visited Israel in 2005.

   Mr Kirchner has also backed moves to try crimes committed by the army
   during its "dirty war" against leftist guerrillas in the 1970s.
   Although Jews make up just 1% of the population they account for 8% of
   those who "disappeared" in that period. On October 9th Christian von
   Wernich, a Catholic priest, was sentenced to life imprisonment for
   complicity in murder, torture and kidnapping. One of those who was
   tortured in his presence was Jacobo Timerman, a prominent Jewish
   newspaper editor.

   Mr Kirchner devoted much of his speech at the UN last month to
   criticising Iran's failure to extradite the suspected officials. In
   this, he seems to be trying to offset his alliance with Venezuela's
   Hugo Chávez, who is friendly with Iran. Although her husband's
   relations with George Bush have been strained, Ms Fernández may reckon
   that a shared dislike of Iran will bring closer ties with the next
   American president.

