
                                                                      EPA

                                    EPA

   After four years in which he transformed his country, Álvaro Uribe is
   running into problems. Some of them are symptoms of success 


   ON THE outskirts of María la Baja, a nondescript town on Colombia's
   swelteringly hot Caribbean coast, the road is lined with palm-thatched
   mud huts. They are the new homes of some 7,000 people displaced by
   violence from their small farms in the nearby hills. They say that
   their problems began when the guerrillas of the Revolutionary Armed
   Forces of Colombia (FARC) appeared in the hills in 2000, stealing
   their cattle. Matters deteriorated further when right-wing
   paramilitaries began to kill people whom they thought were guerrillas
   and forced others to sell or yield their land at gunpoint.

   But in the past couple of years "things have improved a lot," says
   Carlos Ortiz, one of their leaders. The reason: on July 14th 2005, the
   local paramilitary group handed over its weapons and disbanded under a
   peace agreement with the government of President Álvaro Uribe in which
   some 30,000 of the militiamen have demobilised across the country. As
   part of Mr Uribe's security build-up, marines have set up a base on
   the edge of the town, while police patrol the main road north to the
   port of Cartagena.

   "We go back to our farms by day now," says Julio César Azeredo,
   another of the displaced. But, he adds, "it's not safe to stay at
   night." If this corner of northern Colombia is no longer marked by the
   bloody massacres of a few years ago, its new-found peace is fragile.
   "The people have lost confidence in everyone, they don't trust any
   authority," says Giuseppe Svafrena, an Italian Catholic priest who is
   helping them.

   Fragile it may be, but the improvement in security in places like
   María la Baja is real enough. On the strength of it, Mr Uribe secured
   a second four-year term with a landslide 62% of the vote in an
   election last May. But his second term is proving to be more
   complicated than his first.

   Mr Uribe faces two immediate problems. One involves the future of the
   former paramilitaries, and the risk that many return to violent crime.
   The other involves their past: the government has been rocked by a
   series of revelations of links between politicians, officials and the
   paramilitaries. Those revelations (dubbed "parapolitics") risk doing
   serious damage to Mr Uribe's standing abroad, and especially in the
   United States. But for most Colombians the more pressing issue is
   consolidating the gains in security. In opinion polls some 70% of
   respondents continue to support Mr Uribe, despite the parapolitics
   scandal. To understand why requires some recent history.

   During the 1980s and 1990s, the left-wing guerrillas of the FARC and
   its smaller rival, the ELN, grew steadily, reaching a peak of almost
   20,000 troops. Their expansion owed much to money from drugs,
   kidnapping and extortion. They were also helped by Colombia's
   impossible geography and relatively weak state. The flip side of a
   long democratic tradition has been that Colombia's politicians never
   allowed the army to become strong.

   In response, some army commanders and landowners formed paramilitary
   militias (known as "self-defence" groups) to fight the guerrillas. Yet
   some of these were quickly taken over by drug-traffickers and many
   imposed a reign of terror equal to or worse than that of the
   guerrillas. Colombia began to look like a failed state. That prompted
   Andrés Pastrana, Mr Uribe's predecessor, to start to strengthen the
   security forces and to seek American aid.

   Mr Uribe was elected on a pledge to get tough after the FARC had shown
   no interest in peace in three years of talks with Mr Pastrana. He has
   expanded the security forces by a third, adding 60,000 troops and
   30,000 extra police. He placed permanent police detachments in 150
   municipalities (out of a total of 1,080) that lacked them. He created
   a new force of 20,000 part-time "popular soldiers" for local guard
   duties. Six new mountain battalions occupied the high Andean massifs
   which had served as corridors and refuges for the FARC. He turned the
   army into an offensive force, with nine new mobile brigades.

   All this changed the course of the war. The FARC were driven from
   central Colombia, from the populated triangle marked by its three main
   cities, Bogotá, Medellín and Cali. For the first time in years,
   Colombians can drive between most of the country's cities without risk
   of kidnap or hold-up. Partly as a result, the economy has rebounded as
   businesses from oil companies to manufacturers ramp up investment (see
   chart). "My administration began the process of taking back the
   country," Mr Uribe says.

   This security build-up and Mr Uribe's reputation as an implacable foe
   of the guerrillas enabled his government to persuade the
   paramilitaries, grouped in the United Self-Defence Forces of Colombia
   (AUC), to disarm. They did so under a controversial Justice and Peace
   Law. This stipulates that those accused of massacres or other
   barbarous acts can benefit from a reduced sentence (of no more than
   eight years) if they confess and surrender illegally obtained assets.
   The biggest incentive is that the government will not extradite them
   to face drugs charges in the United States as long as they co-operate.

   This peace process has been highly controversial. One set of
   criticisms concerns its terms and another its implementation. Many
   human-rights groups, the paramilitaries' victims and much of the
   opposition considered the law too lenient and its application too lax.
   So did the Constitutional Court, which stiffened the law.

   Only last August were the top leaders jailed pending court hearings.
   Rafael Pardo, a Liberal senator who broke with the president over the
   law, says that he thinks the paramilitaries have demobilised their
   counter-insurgency apparatus and moved out of drugs to avoid
   extradition but are moving, unchecked, into other crime rackets.

   Double standards

   Mr Uribe's defenders argue that Colombia is doing something which no
   other country has managed. "It's a peace process with an undefeated
   military group in which justice is being applied with no amnesty,"
   says Eduardo Pizarro, who heads the government's reconciliation
   commission. Mr Uribe accuses his critics of double standards, since
   they never complained about (and some benefited from) past peace talks
   with guerrillas in which total amnesties were offered.

   But the process is certainly a messy one. The attorney-general's
   office--a branch of the judiciary rather than the executive in
   Colombia--has been swamped. A special unit of 35 attorneys has been
   set up, but it needs more staff and resources. Some 25,000 people have
   registered as victims of the paramilitaries. Mario Iguarán, the
   attorney-general, says that charges may eventually be brought against
   up to 400 of the leaders; he hopes to begin cases against 57 jailed
   chiefs this year.

   The government's scheme to integrate the former paramilitaries into
   civilian life has been flawed. They receive a monthly stipend of up to
   358,000 pesos ($162), but two-thirds of them have yet to receive
   promised training and only two-fifths have jobs. The government did
   the demobilisations "with a system which was only just being created
   and the system collapsed," says Frank Pearl, whom Mr Uribe recruited
   from the private sector last year to sort out the programme.

   The big fear is that many will return to violence. The best estimates
   are that between 2,500 and 3,600 have joined "second-generation"
   paramilitary groups. But officials say that some of these are
   drug-trafficking outfits or purely criminal bands.

   For all its flaws, Colombia's peace process has quickly acquired a
   momentum of its own. One of the strongest signs of that is the
   parapolitics scandal. This began when police arrested a paramilitary
   leader who had failed to rendezvous in a designated area, confiscating
   his computer. This contained a treasure trove of information
   concerning the political contacts of the paramilitaries, who once
   boasted that they controlled a third of Colombia's Congress.

   The revelations are an embarrassment to Mr Uribe. The ten politicians
   (nine legislators and a provincial governor) so far arrested, all from
   the north coast, belong to parties that support him. But most of the
   allegations against them date from 2002, when they backed the official
   Liberal candidate against Mr Uribe, who ran as an independent. More
   damaging is the arrest of Jorge Noguera, whom the president named to
   head the intelligence service.

   Mr Uribe's critics have seized on all this to argue that the president
   is in cahoots with the paramilitaries. But there is no evidence. The
   president counters that he has supported judicial investigations and
   full confessions by the paramilitaries. "The country needs to know in
   depth the tragedy...to realise what is the future we need: a country
   of institutions, without guerrillas, paramilitaries, drug-traffickers
   and corruption," he said in an interview with The Economist. If Mr
   Noguera is found guilty, Mr Uribe promises to apologise.

   That the parapolitics investigations have got so far is in part a
   result of greater security. "Witnesses are coming forward because they
   do not have to fear," says Mr Iguarán. "Who would have dared before to
   go to the district attorney or the judge and declare that the chief of
   the AUC was in league with the government, the mayor or a congressman?
   It's an unanticipated consequence of the Justice and Peace Law."

   It also shows how widespread penetration of politics and government by
   the paramilitaries was. Officials are quietly attempting a similar
   clean-up of the armed forces. A decorated colonel was charged before
   the civilian courts last year after subordinates said that he passed
   off murdered civilians as dead guerrillas. The defence minister, Juan
   Manuel Santos, is easing out other officers and working on reforms of
   military training. He says that control of territory, rather than
   bodycount, will henceforth be the army's performance criterion.

   Colombia is only at the beginning of a long and difficult road to
   peace. Cleaning up the army is a necessary condition for vanquishing
   the paramilitaries completely, argues Alejandro Reyes, a sociologist
   at Bogotá's Rosario university. "Otherwise the civilian population
   won't collaborate with the security forces."

   Such collaboration is vital. The FARC are diminished but unbeaten.
   They think history is going their way: Hugo Chávez in Venezuela has
   expressed sympathy for them in the past; so has Rafael Correa,
   Ecuador's new president. It will take more fighting to persuade them
   to negotiate, let alone submit to the Justice and Peace Law.

   And parapolitics risks weakening Mr Uribe's grip on Congress. A tax
   reform that would have raised government revenues has been watered
   down. The government did manage to renew a wealth tax which should
   provide $4 billion over the next four years. That money will go into
   more helicopters, and surveillance gear to try to track down the FARC
   leadership.

   The other task is to achieve lasting security in places like María la
   Baja. There Pedro Vásquez, a former policeman who spent seven years as
   a paramilitary leader, says that townspeople still come to him to
   complain of crimes and extortion "because they don't trust the
   police". Some of his former troops want to return to action, something
   he doesn't want to do.

   Carlos Gaviria of the centre-left Democratic Pole, Mr Uribe's defeated
   opponent in last year's election, says more is needed than just the
   presence of the army. The state should be present, too, with "schools,
   hospitals and job-creation".

   Colombia's peace process has hitherto relied on the driving will of
   the president, a workaholic whose face is grey with permanent fatigue.
   Lacking are teamwork and institutions. Luis Alfonso Hoyos, who heads
   the president's social-development agency, points proudly to a
   situation-room next to his office where representatives from 13
   ministries co-ordinate policy and action. But that is in Bogotá, a
   long way from places like María la Baja.

