
                                                                  Reuters

                                  Reuters

   Much though Evo Morales (left) might want to be another Hugo Chávez,
   he will not find it easy 


   WHEN FIFA, the body that governs world football, decreed last month
   that international matches could not be played at altitudes above
   2,500 metres (8,200 feet), Evo Morales must have been delighted. For
   once, Bolivia's president could apply his genius for political gesture
   to an issue that does not divide his countrymen. Mr Morales, a keen
   footballer, turned out for a few impromptu matches in La Paz's
   national stadium (altitude: 3,600 metres), cheered on by nearly all of
   Bolivia's 9m people. They see the FIFA ruling, which cites health
   worries, as an attack on their competitive advantage.

   Many of Mr Morales's gestures in the 17 months since he took office as
   Bolivia's first-ever elected president of Andean Indian descent have
   been more divisive. His most popular policy, the nationalisation of
   oil and gas, has irritated foreign governments and investors. The
   "democratic revolution" he promises--a transfer of wealth and power
   from Bolivia's white and mestizo (mixed race) elite to the mainly
   Andean Indian poor--alarms the prosperous eastern provinces. He calls
   the media the "main adversary" of his government and wants to hold
   them accountable to the people. On June 5th the judiciary staged a
   one-day strike to counter a presidential assault on its independence.

   In short, his opponents fear that Mr Morales is leading Bolivia down
   the path that his close friend, Hugo Chávez, has taken Venezuela: one
   of "21st-century socialism" and a presidential monopoly of power.
   "Chávez owns the Bolivian government," says Jorge Quiroga, the leader
   of the opposition Podemos party.

   Mr Chávez is clearly an ally and an inspiration for Mr Morales, but
   does that make him a model? His advisers insist not. "It's a mistake
   to think that Morales is a copy of Chávez," says Pablo Solón, the
   government's foreign-trade envoy.

   There are three reasons to think he may be right, none of which assume
   that Mr Morales would not enjoy wielding absolute power. First, while
   Mr Chávez is a former army officer who came to national prominence by
   leading a failed military coup, Mr Morales is the leader of a
   coca-growers' union and of a coalition of radical "social movements"
   whose protests brought down two previous governments. Mr Morales is
   now their unchallenged leader, but they will resist the idea that all
   change should come from the top down.

   Second, Mr Morales confronts powerful regions headed by elected
   governors opposed to his plan to "refound" Bolivia. Finally, although
   natural gas has been a bonanza, its revenues are far more modest than
   Venezuela's oil billions. Bolivia cannot generate enough growth and
   jobs without private and foreign investment. In short, Venezuela is a
   one-man show but governing Bolivia demands alliances.

   Mr Morales himself seems unsure of where he is heading. His ready
   acceptance of Venezuelan patronage and his raids on independent
   institutions feed suspicions. In April 2006 Mr Morales signed up to Mr
   Chávez's "Bolivarian Alternative for the Americas", a managed-trade
   agreement and anti-American alliance also involving Cuba. Venezuelan
   aid has poured in. It pays for scholarships, a campaign to distribute
   identity cards and the cheques that Mr Morales hands out to mayors for
   local development in the Altiplano, Bolivia's vast western plateau.
   More aid is promised for a network of community radio stations and the
   upgrading of the main state television station.

   Mr Morales also has Mr Chávez's penchant for subverting rival centres
   of power, but perhaps less talent for it. Take the latest clash with
   the judiciary. This began when the Constitutional Tribunal ruled that
   four Supreme-Court justices temporarily appointed by the president
   should yield their seats. Mr Morales called for the tribunal's
   impeachment. The judiciary staged its first-ever strike to resist the
   government's attempt to "throw out the Bolivian judicial system and
   implant a totalitarian regime," said a statement by the Supreme Court.

   In January Mr Morales's supporters tried to unseat the governor of
   Cochabamba, the country's third most-populous province, for proposing
   a referendum on autonomy. Three people died in violent clashes. The
   incident pushed the governor closer to the four opposition-led eastern
   regions that had already backed autonomy in a 2005 referendum.

   These skirmishes are part of an improvised revolution with uncertain
   aims. The vice-president, Álvaro García Linera, recently called for a
   "broadening of elites" and "room for both capitalist and
   post-capitalist development". What opponents see as an assault on
   democracy, the government sees as purging vestiges of
   "anti-democratic" tendencies.

   Greater clarity should soon come from a constituent assembly that is
   writing a new constitution (another device used by Mr Chávez to
   consolidate his power). Mr Morales's Movement to Socialism (MAS)
   proposes to redefine Bolivia as a "unitary, pluri-national,
   communitarian" state that gives pride of place to three dozen
   indigenous "nations". These groups would control territory and natural
   resources and would be represented as communities in a single-chamber
   legislature alongside individual citizens. Private enterprise would be
   protected when it "contributes to economic and socio-cultural
   development". A fourth "social power" would oversee the traditional
   three.

   This smacks of corporatism, not democracy. The opposition objects to
   dividing Bolivia ethnically, and to the abolition of the Senate, where
   small provinces have political weight. The MAS has a majority in the
   assembly but not the two-thirds required to approve a new
   constitutional text. Samuel Doria Medina, the leader of a centrist
   opposition party, thinks compromise is possible. Indigenous "nations",
   for example, could become wispier "nationalities", he says.

   In some moods the government seems open to compromise. "We don't want
   a constitution approved by 60 or 70% of the country but rejected by
   the rest," said Mr García Linera. The final text, due by August 6th,
   will be subject to a referendum and then to interpretation by the
   courts, which Mr Morales does not yet control. What he may really be
   angling for is an end to the current rule that bars presidents from
   consecutive terms, so that he could run for re-election under the new
   constitution next year and again in 2013. In return, he would accept
   the opposition's demands for regional autonomy, says Carlos Toranzo, a
   political analyst.

   Such deal-making would not be out of character. In January, Mr Morales
   dropped a campaign for the assembly to approve constitutional articles
   by simple majority after this provoked huge protests in the eastern
   regions. With the United States, he has arranged a wary, and perhaps
   temporary, truce. Some 40,000 jobs, mainly in the poor western
   highlands, depend directly on American trade concessions, now up for
   renewal. The United States, eager to avoid rupture, is overlooking Mr
   Morales's enthusiasm for coca, the raw material for cocaine. Recently,
   he joined the American ambassador to open a newly-illuminated road
   tunnel-- something it is hard to imagine Mr Chávez doing.

   But charging ahead when he can, and retreating when he must, is not a
   strategy for governance. The inexperienced, often inept, government
   has achieved little beyond boosting ethnic and national pride, and gas
   royalties. Bolivia is enjoying multiple windfalls, from high commodity
   prices to remittances and debt forgiveness. Even so, the economy grew
   less than the Latin American average last year, points out Gonzalo
   Chávez of the Catholic University in La Paz. More than half the
   population is poor, four-fifths of workers labour in the informal
   economy and emigration continues. Mining and gas apart, private
   investment is a negligible 2-3% of GDP. Yet in April Bolivia said it
   would withdraw from an international arbitration panel that investors
   use to resolve disputes. If he does not create good jobs, no amount of
   constitutional gimmickry will sustain Mr Morales's current popularity.

