
   Covering up a death has got harder


   FOR the past few weeks Miami has been gripped by rumours that Fidel
   Castro, Cuba's sick communist president, may be dead. One factor
   fuelling the fire is that Cuban officials insist that his health is a
   state secret, though they also say he continues to recover from
   intestinal surgery. Another is that no new images of Mr Castro were
   issued on his 81st birthday last month. Then there is the deep-rooted
   belief among his opponents that the death of the Líder Máximo will be
   covered up.

   It would not be the first time. El Cid, Spain's quasi-fictional hero
   of the Reconquista, is alleged to have carried on fighting after his
   death, his body strapped to his horse to terrify his Moorish
   opponents. China's first emperor, Qin Shi Huang, died on a journey in
   210BC, but the news was kept quiet for two months until his entourage
   had safely returned to the capital. The death of Edward VI, a young
   English king, was disguised during several days of scheming over his
   succession. Tibetan leaders managed to hide the death of the fifth
   Dalai Lama for no fewer than 15 years.

   But cover-ups have got much harder. Not even the sudden and
   destabilising death of Joseph Stalin or the expected demises of Josip
   Broz Tito, Leonid Brezhnev or Kim Il Sung were hushed up for long. To
   hide the death of a dictator, one of his sidekicks needs to have both
   privileged access to information and the strength to suppress its
   leakage. But any such person is an obvious successor and thus has
   little interest in concealment.

   Nonsense, say the conspiracy theorists in Miami. They point to the
   cases of Spain's General Francisco Franco and Mao Zedong, both of
   whose deaths were revealed on suspiciously symbolic dates (the
   anniversary of Japan's surrender to China, in Mao's case). So just
   before October 10th, the date of Cuba's declaration of independence
   from Spain in 1868, expect another wave of rumours in Miami that Mr
   Castro has passed away.

