
   The president enlists the literary critics


   ASK Chileans what they are reading and the answer will probably be
   Isabel Allende's "La Suma de los Días", a memoir by their country's
   best-known living writer. If, that is, they read anything at all: in a
   recent survey, 45% said they never read books and 34% did so only
   occasionally.

   Michelle Bachelet, Chile's president, wants to change that. To do so,
   she has come up with a scheme to give 400,000 of the poorest families
   a maletín literario or box of up to nine books each. After much
   pencil-chewing, a jury of literati this month selected a list of 49
   works, from which officials will then choose those books they think
   appropriate for each family (each will get an encyclopaedia and/or a
   dictionary).

   The list comprises fiction and poetry for both adults and children. It
   ranges from Chile's Ms Allende and Pablo Neruda to J.D. Salinger's
   "The Catcher in the Rye" and Franz Kafka's "Metamorphosis". This is
   unexceptionable fare. But is the book box the best way to achieve Ms
   Bachelet's laudable aim?

   It could help. While some older Chileans lack functional literacy or
   were alienated by a rigid school syllabus, younger ones may be
   deterred from buying books by their price. This averages $14, higher
   than the Latin American average and the equivalent of two weeks of bus
   fares to and from work in Santiago. If books were cheaper, more
   Chileans would read them: pirated copies sell on pavements, while a
   lending library that operates on the Santiago metro has been a big
   success. With massive orders, the government could force big discounts
   from publishers.

   But critics see the book box as a populist gesture. "It's like
   dropping bank notes out of the sky," complains Verónica Abud of La
   Fuente, a charity that promotes reading. "Who says that a plumber in a
   poor district of Santiago will actually want to read Kafka?" For less
   than the estimated $11m cost of the book box, La Fuente has set up 60
   libraries in schools and neighbourhoods. Since only 7% of Chileans
   belong to a library, there is scope for plenty more.

