
                                                                      AFP

                                    AFP

   In inviting Hugo Chávez (left) to negotiate with the FARC guerrillas,
   Álvaro Uribe (right) has taken a big risk


   IN HIS first term as Colombia's president, Álvaro Uribe set his face
   against any negotiation with the country's left-wing FARC guerrillas,
   arguing that they had to be militarily weakened before they might talk
   seriously about peace. In particular, he rejected the FARC's calls for
   a "humanitarian accord", its Orwellian term for swapping the
   better-known of its kidnapped hostages for dozens of jailed mid-level
   guerrillas. But in a startling about-face, Mr Uribe has invited Hugo
   Chávez, the leftist president of neighbouring Venezuela, to try and
   broker a deal.

   That is a sign of how much pressure Mr Uribe, whose father was
   murdered by the FARC in a botched kidnap, now faces on the issue. The
   FARC has held a number of hostages for up to ten years because it
   considers them canjeable (swappable). The 45 people still in that
   category include Ingrid Betancourt, a politician of dual
   Franco-Colombian nationality; several other politicians; army and
   police officers; and three Americans working under contract to the
   State Department.

   Colombian public opinion has veered towards favouring a swap after the
   killing in June, in circumstances yet to be clarified, of 11 regional
   legislators held by the FARC for the past five years. A schoolteacher
   whose son is a hostage drew widespread public support by marching
   1,000km (620 miles) to Bogotá to call for a swap. France's president,
   Nicolas Sarkozy, has made obtaining the release of Ms Betancourt a
   priority. At his behest, Mr Uribe in June freed Rodrigo Granda, the
   highest-ranking prisoner, who promptly decamped to Cuba.

   Hitherto, the main sticking point has been the FARC's demand for the
   government to withdraw troops from an area where negotiations would
   take place--something most Colombians oppose. It is to break this
   deadlock that Mr Uribe turned to Mr Chávez. The two men are
   ideological opposites but have developed a relationship of wary mutual
   respect. Mr Chávez leapt with gusto at the chance to be seen as a
   regional powerbroker. In the past two weeks he has met Mr Uribe and
   spoken to the families of both the hostages and the guerrilla
   prisoners.

   If anyone can persuade the FARC to deal, it is indeed Mr Chávez. Its
   leaders have already agreed to meet him in Caracas. It is not long ago
   that Colombian officials were publicly accusing him of supporting the
   guerrillas and turning a blind eye to their alleged bases across the
   border in Venezuela. Raúl Reyes, a FARC leader, gave indirect support
   to such claims in an interview with La Jornada, a Mexican newspaper,
   published this week, in which he said he had met Mr Chávez.

   Mr Uribe's defenders have long argued that a hostage swap will merely
   encourage further kidnapping. The FARC was behind nearly a third of
   23,144 kidnappings in Colombia between 1996 and 2006, according to
   País Libre, a group that helps the families of kidnap victims. But
   that objection has been undermined by the president's own success in
   weakening the FARC. In 1998 the guerrillas kidnapped 1,016 people; by
   last year that figure had fallen to 122.

   The bigger risk is that by bringing in Mr Chávez, Mr Uribe has granted
   the FARC an avenue to international legitimacy. If that were the
   prelude to serious peace talks, so much the better. But Mr Chávez, an
   elected president but one who has ridden roughshod over his country's
   institutions, is hardly best placed to persuade the FARC to accept the
   rules of democracy.

   For Mr Chávez, the unexpected role of peacemaker is a welcome break
   from a string of foreign-policy setbacks. His decision not to renew
   the broadcasting licence of an opposition television station, his
   plans to change the constitution to allow himself to be re-elected
   indefinitely, large-scale purchases of Russian arms and resistance in
   Brazil to his attempts to join the Mercosur trade block have all
   diminished his standing in the region.

   His new role as mediator may also amplify his hitherto limited
   influence in Colombia--the main obstacle to his plans to turn his
   "Bolivarian revolution" into a pan-Andean project. After meeting Mr
   Uribe he released a group of Colombian paramilitaries arrested in 2004
   on mysterious charges of plotting a coup in Venezuela. He also
   surprised people in both countries by saying he was anxious to resolve
   a long-standing territorial dispute with Colombia over the Gulf of
   Venezuela.

   But the problem for Mr Chávez--and this might be Mr Uribe's
   calculation--could be that in the end the FARC may reckon that it has
   more to lose than gain by a deal. "The hostages are the only thing the
   FARC have that gets them heard internationally and gives them any
   importance domestically," says Gerson Arias of Ideas para la Paz, a
   think-tank in Bogotá. Whatever the outcome, all three parties in the
   coming negotiations face risks, some of which may be unexpected.

