
   But far from free

                                                                  Reuters

                                  Reuters

             The relatives hope for an end to darkness at noon


   IN AS many weeks, three political prisoners have been freed in Cuba,
   including the longest-serving of them, Francisco Chaviano, after 13
   years in jail. He had been accused in 1994 of revealing state secrets
   during his research into the lives and deaths of balseros, the people
   who--especially in the early 1990s--fled from Cuba on makeshift rafts.

   Much has changed on the island since Mr Chaviano went inside. The
   economic depression which prompted the flight of the balseros has
   eased somewhat. Oil-rich Venezuela under Hugo Chávez has replaced the
   Soviet Union as the country's benefactor. And ill health caused Fidel
   Castro to depart the public stage a year ago, leaving his brother Raúl
   to run the country. Indeed, for the past fortnight opposition circles
   in Miami have again been gripped by rumours of Fidel's death. Although
   no new images of him have been published since early June, newspaper
   articles continue to be published under his name and officials insist
   he continues to convalesce.

   Fidel's view of dissenters was uncomplicated: all were "mercenaries",
   in the pay of the United States. And Raúl? Cuban human-rights groups
   report that in the past year the number of political prisoners held in
   Cuban jails has fallen by 20%, to around 240. There have also been
   fewer government-organised protests outside the homes of dissidents.

   Raúl Castro is understood to be far more open to the idea of debate
   than his brother. Visibly irritated by the congratulatory tone of many
   Communist Party meetings, he has called on Cubans to discuss matters
   "fearlessly". Those close to him say he genuinely likes to hear
   different views and opinions.

   But Cuban dissidents are not cheering yet. They say the government is
   merely being more selective. Many of those released had served all or
   most of their sentences, and they remain on parole. Still languishing
   inside various jails are 61 of the 75 dissidents who were arrested in
   March 2003 during an unprecedented clampdown on political opponents.
   Many of them helped co-ordinate the Varela project, a grassroots
   petition calling for a referendum on political freedoms. The project's
   organiser, Oswaldo Payá, appealed to Raúl Castro recently to free all
   political prisoners in Cuba and to allow multi-party elections. The
   government, said Mr Payá, had punished people enough for holding
   different political opinions.

   But officials prefer to talk about the plight of five Cuban secret
   agents arrested in Miami in 1998 and serving sentences of 15 years to
   life in American jails. The government says they are political
   prisoners since they were sent to defend the island by infiltrating
   exile terrorist groups, and not to spy on the American government.
   This month their lawyers filed the latest of several appeals in an
   Atlanta court.

   Whatever Raúl Castro might think of demands to free his government's
   own prisoners, he has his hands full trying to bring modest reform to
   a sclerotic economy. As long as Fidel is alive and hovering in the
   background, there will be no political change in Cuba.

