
                                                                  Reuters

                                  Reuters

   The president's wife seems certain to succeed him, but will she cool
   an overheating economy?


   ABROAD she is sometimes compared to Hillary Clinton. At home she likes
   to invoke Eva Perón. Either way, Cristina Fernández de Kirchner seems
   certain to win Argentina's presidential election on October 28th, and
   thus to succeed her husband, Néstor Kirchner. If the polls are to be
   believed, she will win by a large enough margin to avoid the need for
   a run-off ballot (see chart 1).

   If so, she will become the first woman to be elected as Argentina's
   president. (Isabelita, Juan Perón's third wife and his vice-president,
   briefly succeeded her husband before being ousted by a military coup
   in 1976.) She likes to point out that she has been a senator since
   1995 and so was a national political figure when her husband was a
   mere provincial governor. But assuming she wins, she will owe her
   victory to his--or their--decision that he would not seek a second
   consecutive term and that she would run in his stead.

   Mr Kirchner has presided over Argentina's vigorous recovery from a
   horrendous economic, financial and political collapse in 2001-02.
   Thanks to four years of annual economic growth of over 8%, poverty and
   unemployment have halved since he took office in 2003 (see chart 2).
   For that, the president can take only some of the credit. He inherited
   a capable economy minister in Roberto Lavagna, who had put in place
   some coherent policies. Idle factories whirred back into action while
   world prices climbed for Argentina's farm exports.

   But Mr Kirchner's brutal treatment of holders of some $81 billion in
   bonds on which Argentina defaulted in 2001 ensured that debt payments
   did not become a drag on growth. He quelled a riotous movement of
   unemployed protesters with a mixture of handouts and diatribes against
   the IMF, big business and the privatisations conducted by Carlos
   Menem, a right-wing Peronist, in the 1990s.

   After winning control of Congress in a mid-term election in 2005, Mr
   Kirchner dumped the prudent Mr Lavagna. Since then, he has
   deliberately allowed the economy to overheat. Interest rates are
   negative in real terms, while the government has opened the fiscal tap
   (so far this year central-government current spending has risen by an
   eyepopping 48% in nominal terms). As a result, inflation is rising
   fast.

   The government has responded with price "agreements" (ie, controls)
   and blatant manipulation of the official inflation index. The real
   figure, suggested by the numbers published by two provinces, may be up
   to twice the official one (see chart 3). Similarly, Mr Kirchner's
   populist approach to energy--energy prices in Argentina are only 60%
   of those of its neighbours--has led to occasional shortages.
   Meanwhile, his government has been hit by several corruption scandals
   this year.

   Nevertheless, Mr Kirchner is still popular--more so than his wife. So
   why did he decline to stand for re-election himself and impose his
   wife as the Peronist candidate? He has never fully explained. Some
   opponents reckon that his intention is to return in four years' time,
   thus prolonging the family hold on power. Insiders say that he
   believes that Ms Fernández's skills are better suited than his own to
   the tasks now facing the country. "She can sit down and bargain
   without having been the person who screwed over anyone," says an
   official who is close to her.

   Ms Fernández has given little away about her intentions. She has
   maintained a big lead in the opinion polls while doing little
   campaigning. Like Mr Kirchner, she does not submit to press
   conferences or interviews by Argentine journalists. She has spent much
   of the past few months travelling abroad--something her husband has
   done very little. She has unveiled few policy plans and held few
   rallies.

   But she is a better public speaker than Mr Kirchner, feisty and
   articulate where he is awkward and uncommunicative. "I identify with
   the Eva Perón who clenched her fist at the microphone, not with
   the...good fairy who arrived with Perón to hand out work and [women's]
   right to vote," she told El País, a Spanish newspaper. But some
   Argentines say she lacks the common touch of the always-remembered
   Evita. Of middle-class background, Ms Fernández and Mr Kirchner met at
   university, and worked as property lawyers in Santa Cruz, the
   Patagonian province of which he became governor. Nowadays Ms Fernández
   sports designer handbags, trademark white suits and, it is said
   snidely, collagen-enhanced lips.

   That she has not been pressed harder in the campaign says much about
   the hapless opposition. The Radical party, the traditional opposition
   to the dominant Peronists, had the misfortune to hold (and lose) power
   during the economic collapse of 2001. Even though they were
   implementing Mr Menem's policies, Argentines blamed the Radicals
   rather than the Peronists for the debacle. The party has shrunk and
   splintered: Julio Cobos, a Radical who is governor of Mendoza
   province, is Ms Fernández's running mate.

   Her main rivals are Mr Lavagna, who presents himself as an
   "alternative" to (rather than an opponent of) the Kirchners, and Elisa
   Carrió, a former Radical who offers little except a campaign against
   corruption. Several others have struggled to break into double figures
   in the polls.

   Ms Fernández not only basks in her husband's popularity. She enjoys
   some of the advantages of incumbency. She has use of the presidential
   jet and friendly coverage on state television. Her opponents say they
   have had trouble raising money because some would-be donors have held
   back for fear of a punitive tax audit. The opposition's divisions also
   help her: she can avoid a run-off provided she gets 40% of the valid
   votes and leads her closest rival by ten points.

   Assuming she wins, will Ms Fernández's policies differ from those of
   her husband? Her political views, like Mr Kirchner's, were forged in
   the Peronist left of the 1970s: nationalism, a sizeable state role in
   the economy and hostility to the armed forces. But aides point to
   differences of emphasis and experience. Ms Fernández has been her
   husband's de facto floor leader in Congress over the past four years.
   Unlike him, she is a negotiator, they say.

   While Mr Kirchner's opponents accuse him of autocratic tendencies, Ms
   Fernández's defenders present her as a champion of democratic
   institutions. On that, however, there are disagreements. She
   championed bills to give the presidency control over judicial
   appointments, and to reallocate congressionally-mandated spending at
   will. Yet she also supported moves to reform the Supreme Court that
   have the backing of NGOs.

   The clearest difference is in foreign policy. Mr Kirchner showed no
   interest in it, beyond an alliance with Venezuela's Hugo Chávez, whose
   government has bought some $5 billion in Argentine bonds and has
   swapped diesel fuel for farm machinery and other products. On her
   trips abroad, Ms Fernández has courted businessmen. She is likely to
   seek better relations with the United States and Europe, but without
   breaking with Mr Chávez. She has said she plans to renegotiate the $7
   billion that Argentina owes the Paris Club of rich-country
   lenders--but rejects the club's requirement that the IMF be involved.
   It is not clear whether she would seek to ease Argentina's access to
   world financial markets by reaching a deal with the holders of bonds
   (worth $20 billion at face value) who did not accept the debt
   restructuring.

   One big doubt is whether she will take the steps, eschewed by Mr
   Kirchner, needed to engineer a soft landing for the economy. Once
   inflation exceeds 20% and energy rationing reaches homes, Argentines
   will surely demand solutions to these problems. But these involve
   unpopular measures for which the public has not been prepared. If
   inflation is to be curbed, rather than covered-up, interest rates will
   have to rise, the growth of public spending will need to be checked,
   and the peso be allowed to appreciate. Energy tariffs will have to
   rise, some of them steeply.

   A second doubt concerns Mr Kirchner's role--assuming it is his wife to
   whom he passes the presidential sash on December 10th. He has vowed to
   remain in politics; although Peronism is a mosaic of warring factions,
   he controls its most powerful political machine. So Argentines will be
   in little doubt that if they vote for Ms Fernández they will be
   getting two Kirchners for the price of one--a somewhat inflated price,
   opponents would doubtless say.

