
   Exporting medicine and influence

                                                                  Reuters

                                  Reuters

            A miracle of Cuban know-how and Venezuelan oil money


   IT MAY be the world's largest medical college. The Latin American
   School of Medical Science, on the western edge of Havana, has 10,000
   students, making it nearly ten times the size of its largest
   equivalent in the United States. The students are all foreigners: most
   are from elsewhere in Latin America, but they include 91 Americans.
   The school is one of several ways in which communist Cuba is using its
   medical prowess to win friends abroad.

   That prowess has been questioned by some of the regime's opponents
   because of unofficial reports that Fidel Castro, Cuba's president, has
   undergone three failed operations for diverticulitis (a swelling of
   the wall of the intestine). But there is as yet no reason to blame the
   president's doctors for his health problems.

   The medical school was founded in 1998. Only two classes have so far
   graduated from its six-year programme. Its buildings are not imposing;
   many of its students are dispersed on satellite campuses around Cuba.
   But tuition, accommodation and board are all free.

   The school is only one aspect of Cuba's commitment to exporting
   medicine. Another is the deployment of Cuban doctors overseas.
   Hundreds were sent to Central America in the aftermath of hurricanes
   and other natural disasters in the 1990s. More than 15,000 doctors and
   dentists are working for Hugo Chávez's government in Venezuela, in a
   Cuban-designed family-doctor programme. Others have been sent to
   Bolivia, to support Evo Morales's government, and to Ecuador. More may
   go to Nicaragua, and to Ecuador: both countries recently elected
   presidents friendly to Mr Castro. Farther afield, Pakistan's prime
   minister this month singled out Cuban doctors for their help after a
   2005 earthquake which killed some 74,000 people.

   In all, about one in three of Cuba's doctors is working abroad at any
   given time, according to Daniel Erikson of the Inter-American
   Dialogue, a think-tank in Washington, DC. At the same time, increasing
   numbers of foreigners are coming to Cuba for operations. This began as
   a foreign-exchange earner in the 1990s. More recently, Mr Chávez and
   Mr Castro set up "Operation Miracle", a scheme under which Venezuela
   pays for thousands of poor Latin Americans to undergo cataract and
   other eye operations in Cuba.

   This medical diplomacy brings Cuba clout abroad but it causes grumbles
   at home. Cuba has two and a half times as many doctors per head as the
   United States. Even so, with so many working abroad, some clinics in
   Havana are understaffed and others have closed. Drugs and medical
   equipment are in short supply in the island's hospitals, say the
   medical students. That is something that Mr Castro's successors may
   face pressure to redress.

