
   A political deal to improve schools


   THE Escuela República Árabe Siria in Valparaíso, named for the early
   support it received from Syrian immigrants, has a better view than the
   Grange School in Santiago. But that is its only advantage. Perched
   above a hill-encircled Pacific bay, the school serves one of the most
   depressed areas of a declining port city. Stray dogs wander across the
   dusty playground, the paint is peeling, windows lack panes and the
   printers attached to the donated computers lack ink. By contrast, the
   Grange, one of Chile's top private schools, has modern laboratories
   and manicured playing fields. Unsurprisingly, in a 2006 national test
   fourth-year primary pupils from the Valparaíso school scored on
   average 50% less than their peers at the Grange.

   This inequality between schools is the Achilles heel of Chile's
   education system. In the latest Programme for International Student
   Assessment, released this month by the Organisation for Economic
   Co-operation and Development (OECD), Chile did better than other Latin
   American countries (see chart), though it ranked only 40th out of the
   57 (mainly developed) countries that took part.

   But the OECD found that in Chile the gap between the performances of
   different schools was one of the widest in the region and that this
   was more closely correlated to pupils' socio-economic background than
   was the case anywhere else. This inequality of outcomes among schools
   is a big reason why Chile's income distribution remains very
   unequal--even by Latin American standards and even after almost two
   decades of democratic government.

   Money is one important issue. Fees at the Grange, at around $670 per
   month, are cheap by regional standards. But they are roughly ten times
   the grant per pupil that the municipality of Valparaíso receives from
   the education ministry for running the Escuela Árabe Siria. A bill
   close to being approved in Congress would raise this grant by 15% and
   by a further 50% for very poor schools.

   After four months of talks, the government of Michelle Bachelet and
   the opposition have also reached agreement on a broader reform of
   education. This follows huge demonstrations by schoolchildren last
   year against the poor quality of state schooling. The protests seem to
   have shamed the politicians into setting aside an ideological
   tug-of-war between those wanting more state control and those in
   favour of letting the market and parental choice do their work.

   This battle dates from the dictatorship of General Augusto Pinochet
   (1973-90), which established the quasi-voucher system under which
   municipal and privately-run schools compete for state grants and
   pupils. "For the first time, we've agreed to just get on with
   improving standards instead of arguing about the system's structure,"
   says an official.

   If approved by Congress, a new superintendency of education will
   supervise the use of state grants by both municipal and private
   schools, while a "quality agency" will monitor teaching standards and
   pupil attainment. Failing schools will face closure. The
   superintendency should shine light on how local governments spend
   their education grants, and whether these reach the poorest schools.
   To try and reduce social segregation, privately-run state-funded
   schools will not be able to select pupils by ability until they are
   aged 11. (This will not apply to private schools like the Grange that
   receive no state money.)

   The reform does not deal with several important issues. One is that
   some municipal governments are clearly not up to the job of running
   schools in poorer areas. One idea is to group the education
   departments of weaker municipalities.

   Yasna Provoste, the education minister, calls the agreement
   "historic". Whether that turns out to be more than a cliché depends on
   the reform's implementation. But it might just mark the moment when
   Chile starts to tackle one of the main obstacles to its becoming a
   developed country--and a fairer one.

