
   A case of double standards

   HIS enemies call Luis Posada Carriles the "bin Laden of the Americas".
   His release from a New Mexico jail on April 19th has sparked
   accusations of inconsistency in President George Bush's "war on
   terror". They accuse Mr Posada, an elderly Cuban exile, of one of the
   most notorious crimes in recent Latin American history: the bombing of
   a Cuban airliner off Barbados in 1976 in which all 73 people on board
   died. Mr Posada, who has Venezuelan citizenship, was charged with the
   bombing in his adopted country. Venezuela's courts consider him a
   fugitive after he escaped from jail in 1985 while awaiting trial.

   Both Cuba and Venezuela want the United States to extradite Mr Posada.
   His lawyers argue that he would face torture in either country. But he
   is unlikely to enjoy the comfort of his home in Miami for very long.
   He was released on bail pending trial on May 11th in Texas on seven
   counts of immigration fraud and lying about his illegal entry into the
   country. If convicted, he could face up to 40 years in jail. Since he
   is 79 and frail, any substantial jail sentence might in practice be
   for life.

   The Justice Department claims it did everything it could to dissuade
   the judge from ordering Mr Posada's release. "We can't just
   unilaterally order a person to be held," a spokesman said. But critics
   point out that the government frequently does just that under the
   anti-terrorist Patriot Act.

   Why has this not been used against Mr Posada? In court papers,
   prosecutors describe him as "an unrepentant criminal and admitted
   mastermind of terrorist plots". But Mr Posada spent much of the cold
   war working with the Central Intelligence Agency. He took part in the
   Bay of Pigs, the CIA's failed attempt to invade Fidel Castro's Cuba in
   1961. He later helped to smuggle arms to anti-communist rebels in
   Nicaragua.

   Mr Posada also boasted of organising several small bombs in Cuban
   hotels in 1997, one of which killed an Italian tourist (he later
   retracted this claim). Three years later Cuba accused him of plotting
   to assassinate Mr Castro at a summit in Panama. He was jailed, but
   subsequently pardoned.

   Prosecutors say that he lied about how he returned to the United
   States in 2005 in order to protect fellow Cuban exiles in Miami who
   helped smuggle him in by boat. That may prove to be his undoing. But
   the failure to extradite him may make other countries warier of
   collaborating with American justice.

