
   The imbroglio over a cash-stuffed suitcase

                                                                      EPA
                                                                      EPA

                                   The Kirchners and their wealthy friend


   WHEN Cristina Fernández replaced her husband, Néstor Kirchner, as
   Argentina's president on December 10th, she hinted that she would
   improve her country's strained relations with the United States. But
   exactly a week later a prosecutor in Miami accused five men of trying
   to cover up an alleged effort to funnel Venezuelan cash to Ms
   Fernández's election campaign. The president promptly accused the
   United States government of mounting "a garbage operation" against
   her. With the only two of the five so far indicted pleading not guilty
   on December 27th, the stage seems set for months of revelations--and
   bad blood.

   At the centre of this tangle is Guido Antonini Wilson, a Venezuelan
   businessman who also has an American passport and who lives in Key
   Biscayne, a wealthy Miami enclave. Last August Mr Antonini arrived in
   Buenos Aires from Caracas on a private jet chartered by Argentina's
   state energy company, clutching a suitcase with $800,000 in cash which
   he had failed to declare. Customs officials confiscated the cash but
   let Mr Antonini go. When the story reached the Argentine papers, Mr
   Kirchner sacked Claudio Uberti, his unofficial envoy to Caracas who
   was also on the plane, as were officials from PDVSA, Venezuela's state
   oil company.

   Thereafter the five accused--four Venezuelans and a Uruguayan--met Mr
   Antonini several times in Miami. According to the American Justice
   Department, they tried through threats and the offer of $2m to
   persuade him not to reveal that the cash came from the Venezuelan
   government and, prosecutors claim, was intended for Ms Fernandez's
   campaign. These conversations were recorded secretly by Mr Antonini,
   who was co-operating with the FBI, and are alleged to have included
   several phone calls with officials in Venezuela's secret police. The
   Justice Department has charged the five with operating illegally as
   Venezuelan government agents. Of that there is no proof, says Ed
   Shohat, a defence lawyer. They were merely offering friendly advice to
   Mr Antonini, he said.

   Argentine officials claim that the whole case is a CIA fabrication and
   a reprisal for the Kirchners' ties to Venezuela's left-wing president,
   Hugo Chávez. Mr Kirchner demanded that the Americans send Mr Antonini
   to Argentina to face justice there. But that begs the question as to
   why the Argentine government allowed him to leave in August, and had
   shown no subsequent interest in investigating him. Mr Uberti's former
   secretary told an Argentine judge last month that she saw Mr Antonini
   at a reception at the presidential palace two days after the cash was
   discovered.

   Mr Kirchner's government forged an alliance of convenience with Mr
   Chávez. Since 2005 Venezuela has bought $5 billion of Argentine bonds,
   most of which it has passed on to friendly local banks at a steep
   discount; it has sold Argentina diesel fuel under special arrangements
   that include the purchase of Argentine products from providers
   selected by the governments without competitive tenders.

   American officials have long been searching for evidence to back up
   their claims that Mr Chávez is using Venezuelan oil wealth to fund
   political allies across Latin America. The case may establish whether
   they have now found convincing proof of that. It has already shone
   light on the extravagant lifestyle of a small group of wealthy
   Venezuelan expatriates in Florida with close business ties to Mr
   Chávez's government, of which both Mr Antonini and the accused formed
   part. One of the defendants, Franklin Durán, drives a Ferrari; in
   partnership with another, he owns a petrochemical firm which has
   contracts with PDVSA.

   After her initial outburst, Ms Fernández herself has kept quiet about
   the case. But her government has restricted contacts with the American
   ambassador in Buenos Aires. She is playing to a public that is more
   anti-American than any other south of the Rio Grande. As Joaquín
   Morales Solá, a political analyst, puts it, the Argentine
   predisposition "is to look for a conspiracy, to see captive courts [in
   the United States] because Argentina has them. It's a mixture of
   narcissism and naivety."

