
                                                                  Reuters

                                  Reuters

   The shift from Néstor to Cristina Kirchner offers a chance for
   change--even if this may prove to be largely cosmetic


   THE polling stations were still open on October 28th when a pair of
   giant inflatable penguins, one male, one female, were set up in the
   plaza outside the hotel where Cristina Fernández de Kirchner
   celebrated her election as Argentina's president. Her husband, Néstor,
   who has held the job since 2003, revels in his nickname the "penguin",
   bestowed upon him because of his previous job as governor of the
   distant Patagonian province of Santa Cruz. And like a true penguin, he
   showed his commitment to his family with his surprising decision
   earlier this year to have his wife run in his stead.

   Once that decision was taken, it was almost a formality that she would
   go on to become the first woman to be elected as Argentina's
   president. The Kirchners control the Peronist movement, the country's
   most powerful political machine: Ms Fernández was anointed, rather
   than having to submit to a primary. Many voters credit them for the
   country's economic recovery.

   The election cements their place at the forefront of the country's
   politics for the foreseeable future. Ms Fernández won 45% of the vote,
   enough to avoid a run-off. She won commanding majorities in the
   working-class suburbs of Buenos Aires and among poorer voters across
   the country. The Kirchners' supporters increased their majority in
   both houses of Congress. Daniel Scioli, Mr Kirchner's vice-president,
   was elected to the powerful post of governor of Buenos Aires province
   (home to almost 40% of Argentines), though he may yet prove a
   fair-weather friend.

   The missing ingredient that might have turned the election into a
   contest was a credible opposition. The Radicals, the Peronists' main
   opponents for the past 60 years, were pulverised by the economic and
   financial collapse of 2001-02, which toppled them from power. Elisa
   Carrió, a centrist anti-corruption campaigner and a former Radical,
   came a distant but creditable second with 23%, while Roberto Lavagna,
   Mr Kirchner's former economy minister, got 17%. Ms Carrió did well
   among the middle classes in the big cities, underlining the social
   polarisation that has often characterised Argentine politics.

   Ms Fernández was a nationally-known politician before her husband: she
   has been in Congress since 1995. Both Kirchners cut their political
   teeth in the left-wing Peronist youth movement of the turbulent 1970s,
   before graduating as lawyers. She is more worldly than her husband,
   and may be a shade more moderate. But she has been a powerful
   influence behind the scenes during Mr Kirchner's presidency, in which
   he has excoriated the IMF, the privatisations of the 1990s and
   multinational energy companies, while striking a firm alliance with
   Venezuela's Hugo Chávez.

   After Ms Fernández receives the presidential sash from her husband on
   December 10th, how much continuity or how much change will she offer?
   Since she did little active campaigning, that is hard to predict. But
   the most visible change may come in foreign policy. She wants to
   improve Argentina's relations with the world, which are still strained
   by its break with the IMF and the 2001 debt default. Mr Kirchner
   rarely travelled and notoriously snubbed foreign visitors. In
   contrast, Ms Fernández has spent much of the past few months abroad
   courting foreign leaders and businessmen. She has vowed to renegotiate
   the $7 billion Argentina still owes the Paris Club group of creditor
   governments, and has echoed Brazil's president, Luis Inácio Lula da
   Silva, in seeking to position herself as an intermediary between Mr
   Chávez and the United States.

   But her immediate task will be to consolidate Argentina's economic
   recovery. Though helped by high prices for farm exports, this is
   showing fragility. Overheating has become increasingly pronounced
   since late 2005, when Mr Kirchner dropped the prudent Mr Lavagna:
   interest rates are negative in real terms, public spending has surged
   and so has inflation, despite price controls on food and energy.

   Having tiptoed around these problems for much of the campaign, in the
   past fortnight Ms Fernández has dropped hints that she will address
   them, but gradually. Public spending is likely to grow more slowly,
   and utility tariffs may rise for the middle class. She has promised
   that the much-manipulated inflation index will in future employ a
   similar methodology to that in the United States. But it is not clear
   whether she will contemplate a rise in interest rates or an
   appreciation of the peso.

   Despite her clear mandate, Ms Fernández may find governing more
   difficult than has Mr Kirchner. Her relationship with the Peronist
   base of unions, party-machine mayors, and street-protest organisations
   is distant. It could be strained if she curbs wage increases and
   public works to fight inflation. "There will be conflicts," says
   Manuel Mora y Araujo, a political analyst. "Those people are tough,
   and they don't negotiate easily."

   Mr Kirchner could do his wife a favour by taking some unpopular
   measures, such as raising utility tariffs and export taxes on farm
   products, over the next month. She may also rely on him in other ways.
   He has said he plans to devote his energies to creating a new
   centre-left coalition, gathering together the Peronist left and
   sections of the Radicals, to form an Argentine equivalent of Chile's
   successful governing coalition, the Concertación.

   Opponents have criticised Mr Kirchner as high-handed and as a man who
   has shown little willingness to be held accountable to democratic
   institutions. Ms Fernández has struck a different tone. In a
   conciliatory victory speech she offered to "extend a hand" to the
   opposition. But as she spoke some of her supporters broke into the
   Peronist party anthem. Whatever Ms Fernández's intentions, Argentina
   may be in for rather more continuity than change.

