
   Bachelet picks a new strongman


   WHEN she took office as Chile's president almost two years ago,
   Michelle Bachelet promised to be a different kind of politician, one
   who would lead a "citizens' democracy". Her first cabinet contained
   only two members with previous ministerial experience; half of its
   members were women and several were independents. Three reshuffles
   later, on January 8th, Ms Bachelet unveiled her latest team, one
   stuffed with seasoned party figures.

   That smacks of near-desperation. Broadly speaking, Chile remains a
   success story. Ms Bachelet has some achievements, such as an agreement
   on education reform, new child-care centres and wider health care. But
   she is much less popular than she was, and her government has found it
   hard to shake off a sense of drift.

   The economy no longer outperforms its neighbours, despite record
   copper revenues. High energy prices--Chile imports almost all its oil
   and gas--have contributed to a blip in inflation. A new transport
   scheme in Santiago, designed under her predecessor, has brought misery
   for commuters. Not all of this is the president's fault. But she has
   been both hesitant and meddling, and has often allowed a small cabal
   of personal advisers to overrule and undermine ministers.

   The reshuffle is a fresh start, she said. But it was a clumsy one.
   After weeks of delay, her hand was forced by the sudden resignation of
   her interior minister. His replacement, Edmundo Pérez Yoma, is a
   plain-speaking and experienced Christian Democrat who as defence
   minister in the 1990s oversaw the departure as army commander of
   General Augusto Pinochet, the former dictator. He is expected to act
   as a de facto prime minister--if the president lets him. The changes
   weaken the position of Andrés Velasco, the ultra-orthodox finance
   minister, several of whose protégés have lost their jobs. Mr Pérez
   Yoma criticised him last year for lacking "imagination and boldness".

   The reshuffle is in part an attempt to shore up Soledad Alvear, the
   leader of the Christian Democrats (DC), one of three main parties in
   the centre-left Concertación coalition, which has ruled Chile since
   the return of democracy in 1990. The DC suffered a serious split last
   month, when supporters of Ms Alvear, who is a potential presidential
   candidate, expelled Adolfo Zaldívar, a senator who led the party's
   right wing. Several of his senior followers departed too. As a result,
   the Concertación has lost its majority in Congress.

   It has also lost much of its discipline and energy. Municipal
   elections are due in October, which in turn will mark the start of
   campaigning for the next presidential election in December 2009.
   Although the right has not won a presidential vote in Chile for half a
   century, many in the Concertación fear that after almost two decades
   in power their time is nearly up. The risk for Ms Bachelet and Mr
   Pérez Yoma is that this defeatism could become self-fulfilling. They
   have their work cut out.

