
   The IMF can sleep easy


   DREAMT up by Venezuela's Hugo Chávez as an alternative to the wicked
   World Bank and the even more wicked IMF, the Banco del Sur (Bank of
   the South), which seven South American governments signed up to on
   December 9th, flatters to deceive. Despite months of talks, there is
   still no agreement on its capital or its statutes. Rather than a
   gesture of defiance, the bank looks like an object lesson in why South
   American unity is so hard.

   Mr Chávez conceived it as a political tool of his "Bolivarian
   revolution", to free other countries in the region from the yoke of
   the Bretton Woods institutions. "If we hand it over to the técnicos,
   then it is already dead," he said in August. He offered to donate to
   it up to half of Venezuela's foreign-exchange reserves of $30 billion.
   This week Venezuelan officials said that they would invite African
   countries to join.

   Such technocrats are exactly the people Brazil insists should staff
   the bank--if it must be staffed at all. Brazilian diplomats have been
   unusually frank in revealing their lack of enthusiasm for the new
   institution. They fear it may give soft, politically driven loans that
   go unpaid. Brazil already has its own well-endowed development bank,
   the BNDES, whose lending of 62.5 billion reais ($37 billion) in the 12
   months to September was 50% greater than that of the World Bank in the
   same period.

   The Brazilians have gone along with the project only because they feel
   they cannot remain outside any new South American institution,
   especially one with money. But they have worked to limit the bank's
   remit and to slow its creation.

   Mr Chávez can count on the vote of Bolivia and maybe that of Ecuador
   on the bank's board. But other members are likely to side with
   Brazil--and so will Chile, Colombia and Peru if they join. So expect a
   modest outfit that mainly finances cross-border infrastructure. The
   World Bank and the Inter-American Development Bank (not to speak of
   the Andean Development Corporation) do that already. But competition
   is a fine thing--even if it is not what Mr Chávez had in mind.

