
   President Torrijos's grip is beginning to falter

   PANAMA'S president, Martín Torrijos, is said to have been elected in
   May 2004 for two reasons: his promise to tackle vested interests and
   his genes. His father, General Omar Torrijos, a former dictator, is
   revered as the man who won back the Panama Canal from the Americans.
   Hitherto, this had given Mr Torrijos the clout to persuade the ruling
   centre-left Democratic Revolutionary Party (PRD), founded by his
   father, to accept much-needed economic reforms. But his grip may now
   be faltering.

   As president, Mr Torrijos has overhauled the deficit-ridden
   social-security system, and seen off opposition from anti-globalisers
   to a $5.25 billion project to widen the canal. He has also negotiated
   a free-trade treaty with the United States. But this has not yet been
   ratified by Washington--for a reason that reveals the continuing
   strength of the PRD's nationalist left-wing.

   The United States is refusing to ratify the deal so long as Pedro
   Miguel González, a PRD member, remains president of Panama's National
   Assembly. He is wanted by America for the murder of an American army
   sergeant in 1992, three years after the American invasion of Panama,
   when the country's dictator, Manuel Antonio Noriega, was toppled. He
   had been backed by the PRD.

   Mr Torrijos has made private appeals to his party to get Mr González
   to step aside before the latter's term ends in September. But he seems
   unwilling to risk a public confrontation with the PRD's nationalistic
   wing or the country at large. By delaying the possibility of
   ratification until shortly before the American presidential election,
   he risks killing the deal. Many business leaders are appalled.

   The president has other troubles, too. Inflation has edged up,
   prompting a rash of wage demands and public-sector strikes. Under the
   constitution, he cannot stand for a second term. He may not have much
   say about who will succeed him as president either. Elections are due
   in 2009. Balbina Herrera, housing minister and standard-bearer of the
   PRD's left wing, is currently in the lead. The opposition is fractured
   and compromised by its business ties. Although the economy is booming,
   Mr Torrijos may find that vested interests end up proving stronger
   than the appeal of genes.

