
   Arguments over price controls


   ON THE last Saturday in March the broad Avenida Bolívar in the heart
   of Venezuela's capital was transformed into an open-air,
   government-run "mega-market". Shoppers, mainly from poorer parts of
   the city, formed orderly queues to buy food at officially regulated
   prices--something that is often impossible in ordinary shops. "How can
   there be scarcity in a country with so much land and resources?" asked
   Ramón Díaz, a pensioner, as he rested on a bench after doing his
   shopping. "Who controls the supply of meat? The oligarchy has it
   monopolised."

   Who controls the food supply and why a fertile and oil-rich country
   should have problems getting food to its 27m people are questions that
   pit the leftist government of Hugo Chávez against much of the private
   sector. Venezuela has one of the world's highest inflation rates (see
   chart). Food prices are rising even faster than the overall index.
   That is despite--or because of--the fact that food, medicines and
   basic services have been subject to price controls since 2003. Meat,
   milk, black beans and sugar are among many products that, from time to
   time, disappear from the shelves--even those of Mercal, the
   government-run supermarket chain. Often, though, these goods can be
   found at much higher prices in the hands of street traders.

   The government has a simple answer to the conundrum. "It's part of the
   curse of capitalism," according to Mr Chávez. In February he declared
   war on "hoarders and speculators", issuing a decree mandating jail
   sentences of up to six years for anyone interfering with food
   supplies. The government promptly seized a slaughterhouse and a
   cold-store.

   Many businessmen and shopkeepers have a different view. They complain
   that controlled prices are set so low that they are obliged to sell at
   a loss. If they don't, they risk fines, temporary closure,
   expropriation or even imprisonment. In late March, for instance, the
   government temporarily closed 17 butchers' shops it accused of
   breaking price regulations. Mr Chávez has said that if he has to take
   over the entire food industry he will, although many Venezuelans doubt
   the government would be capable of running it.

   Officials usually say that the problem is hoarding, not shortages. But
   Jorge Giordani, the planning minister, recently admitted that an
   overheating economy (it grew by over 10% last year) was causing
   inflation and scarcity. Public spending has doubled in the past two
   years. There are two other factors, says Pavel Gómez of IESA, a
   Caracas business school: the price controls themselves, which have
   boosted demand and cut supply, and an expectation that prices will
   rise further, leading people to bring forward purchases.

   To make matters worse, the government recently curbed imports,
   ostensibly to protect local manufacturers. Some of them now complain
   that they cannot obtain the materials they need to make their
   products. Many businessmen are reluctant to invest, citing uncertainty
   over Mr Chávez's intentions and lack of legal protection. In which
   case, say government supporters, the state should step into the
   breach. Expect more shortages.

