
   A new cell for an old dictator

   THE deposing of Manuel Noriega by American forces nearly two decades
   ago was an affair to remember. Paratroopers seized Panama's airfields.
   Mr Noriega holed up in the Vatican embassy. He eventually surrendered
   on January 3rd 1990. The invasion had been triggered by his indictment
   for drug trafficking, for which he was duly convicted by American
   courts.

   On September 9th this year the former dictator finished serving 15
   years in Miami. Having been accorded prisoner-of-war status, he was
   able to live in relative comfort; his cell had exercise equipment, a
   phone and a television. On finishing his sentence, he had been
   expected to return home, where he has been convicted of complicity in
   the 1985 murder of a political opponent.

   But the government of Martín Torrijos seems hesitant to accept him.
   This President Torrijos is the son of Omar Torrijos, who ruled from
   1968 to 1981 and was Mr Noriega's mentor. Though the government has
   called for his extradition, many suspect that Mr Torrijos is happy to
   see the former dictator sent to France, where he was convicted in 1999
   on money-laundering charges. Mr Torrijos is a member of the
   Revolutionary Democratic Party (PRD), as was Mr Noriega; the
   newly-elected PRD speaker of the National Assembly is himself wanted
   by America on murder charges. Critics of Mr Torrijos say he would
   rather avoid the difficult questions that would be bound to be raised
   by Mr Noriega's return.

   France has promised to allow the former dictator to continue to be
   treated as a prisoner of war. This clears the way for American courts
   to reject a series of appeals by his lawyers. He faces a ten-year term
   in France, making it possible that he will die before returning home.
   Were he to go first to Panama, he could not be sent to France, as
   Panama's constitution prohibits the extradition of its citizens. For
   the moment Mr Noriega remains in his cell in Miami, awaiting a final
   decision. As soon as Condoleezza Rice, America's secretary of state,
   signs a letter of extradition, he will be sent to Paris.

   Mr Noriega is a nasty piece of work, but it took a while before his
   foreign mentors found it expedient to take notice. For many years he
   was a CIA asset. In 1987 France gave him the Légion d'honneur. Maybe
   he can wear it in jail.

