
   A decade of bad relations?

   A MONTH after it opened, the cellulose mill built in Fray Bentos by
   Metsa-Botnia, a Finnish company, at a cost of $1.2 billion, already
   makes an impact on the senses. A conveyor-belt takes wood chips up a
   soaring outdoor ramp into silos where they are pulped and shipped down
   the Uruguay river, which forms the country's border with Argentina.
   The process generates a steady whirring sound, a plume of steam from a
   120 metre (400 feet) chimney and--only for the first few weeks, the
   firm insists--a smell strongly reminiscent of boiled cauliflower.

   The plant is the biggest single investment in Uruguay's history. It
   symbolises a long-awaited economic renewal. But for a group of
   protesters across the river in Argentina, it is a polluting behemoth
   that will destroy their crops and turn tourists away. They have
   blocked the international bridge near the factory for most of the past
   two years. Argentina's government supports them, and the dispute has
   brought relations between the two countries--whose culture and
   economies have been inseparable since their founding--to their coolest
   point in 50 years.

   Although construction of the plant was finished by October, Tabaré
   Vázquez, Uruguay's president, agreed to delay its opening until the
   Ibero-American summit in early November in the hopes of reaching a
   deal. But no progress was made at the summit, and a frustrated Mr
   Vázquez authorised Botnia to begin operating without informing his
   Argentine counterpart, Néstor Kirchner. When Mr Kirchner found out the
   next day, he told Mr Vázquez that he had "stabbed the Argentine people
   in the back". An Argentine official said that repairing the damage
   would take "a decade".

   The dispute will be the first foreign-policy test for Cristina
   Fernández de Kirchner, the president's wife, who succeeds him on
   December 10th. Ms Fernández has promised to improve relations with
   fellow members of Mercosur, a South American trade block to which
   Uruguay belongs, which have been strained.

   But she also backs Argentina's claim at the International Court of
   Justice that Uruguay did not consult Argentina, as it was legally
   obliged to, before approving the mill. Even if the tribunal rules in
   favour of Argentina it is highly unlikely to order a drastic remedy,
   such as moving the plant. The protesters vow to remain on the bridge
   until Botnia leaves Fray Bentos. Some officials have suggested that
   Argentina might impose capital controls or trade sanctions on Uruguay,
   whose small economy is closely linked to its neighbour's. Doing so
   would make Argentina look like a bully, and might even drive Uruguay
   out of Mercosur, annoying Brazil, whose government Ms Fernández is
   courting. The protests have already cost Uruguay $500m, according to
   its government.

   The outcome may depend on the plant's environmental impact. Uruguay's
   left-of-centre government says it will close the mill if, as
   protesters fear, it causes acid rain or poisons the river. By
   contrast, if the factory is as clean as Botnia claims, it will be
   easier for Ms Fernández to withdraw support for the demonstrators.

   Yet even if the governments make it up, restoring friendship across
   the river will be hard. "There's a lot of sadness and anger," says
   Nelson Fernández, a television news director in Montevideo. "The
   wounds will last for a very long time."

