
   Development bankers face growing competition

   IT IS the strange fate of the World Bank to unite enemies on the left
   and right. While Hugo Chávez, Venezuela's leftist president, wants the
   bank out of his backyard, its conservative critics think it should let
   go of most of its Latin American clients, who they say are now much
   better served by private capital.

   Only a handful of countries in the region are poor enough to qualify
   for the bank's soft loans and handouts. The rest borrow from its
   money-making arm, the International Bank for Reconstruction and
   Development (IBRD). This had $36.3 billion of loans to the region on
   its books at the end of the last fiscal year.

   Latin America is where the bank makes much of its money. It earned
   $1.7 billion in interest and fees last year, 36% of the total. But
   demand for its loans is wavering (see chart). As the cost of borrowing
   in the capital markets has fallen, both the World Bank and its
   regional equivalent, the Inter-American Development Bank (IDB), find
   it harder to compete on price.

   Moreover, private creditors do not care how their money is used, as
   long as it is repaid. The World Bank is more particular. For example,
   the projects it backs must take pains not to despoil the environment
   unduly or uproot indigenous peoples unfairly.

   Rather than surrendering its best customers to private creditors, the
   bank wants to price its loans more keenly and make borrowing less
   cumbersome, using a country's own auditing and procurement methods
   wherever they are up to scratch.

   The IDB, which has escaped Mr Chávez's ire, faces a similar challenge.
   "We have to reinvent ourselves," says its president, Luis Alberto
   Moreno. He says that one way the bank is doing so is by lending to
   state and local governments who lack the sovereign guarantee needed to
   borrow cheaply in markets. It is also focusing on infrastructure
   projects such as water, sewerage and rural electricity, as well as
   microfinance schemes.

   Both banks are also looking at regionwide projects, which are more
   complicated to finance commercially. The World Bank has a
   tele-medicine network, which conveys medical findings in the United
   States to hospitals in the farther reaches of Latin America. Both also
   stress that their loans come with valuable technical advice. Critics
   say they should do more to separate the two.

   Mr Chávez portrays the World Bank as a domineering patron, imposing
   its beliefs on any nation that takes its coin. It would be more
   accurate to describe it as a fading brand, anxious to serve its
   customers better in a newly crowded marketplace.

