
   A precarious arrangement is at risk


   TWO years ago President Álvaro Uribe promulgated a controversial law
   to regulate the demobilisation of some 31,000 members of the
   right-wing paramilitary groups who for years fought left-wing
   guerrillas by inflicting a reign of terror in the Colombian
   countryside. The law pardoned the rank-and-file fighters while
   offering reduced sentences to those charged with crimes against
   humanity--in return for their co-operation with investigators. Their
   assets were to be used to compensate victims. The official hope was
   that this offered an acceptable balance between the conflicting
   interests of justice, reparation and the achievement of peace with an
   undefeated outlaw army.

   Yet two years on, nobody is satisfied. Rights groups say the law is a
   cloak for impunity. The paramilitary leaders complain that they were
   duped by promises of lenient treatment, since broken. Officials say
   peace has been sabotaged by the courts. Hundreds of former fighters
   are re-arming.

   Universal dissatisfaction might suggest to some that the government
   has got the balance right--except that the whole precarious structure
   of the peace process now looks at risk of crashing down. Last month
   the Supreme Court ruled that the rank-and-file paramilitaries could
   not be considered to have committed (and thus be pardoned for) the
   political crime of sedition, as the law envisages.

   The court's argument was that the paramilitaries did not rise against
   the state, but acted in complicity with some army officers and
   politicians to defend economic interests (such as those of
   drug-traffickers). So, it ruled, they engaged in a criminal conspiracy
   for which they cannot be pardoned or amnestied.

   That may be legally true. But Mr Uribe accused the court of double
   standards in having considered in the past that the crimes of the
   left-wing guerrillas, which include the murder and kidnap of civilians
   as well as drug-trafficking, are political in nature. The jailed
   paramilitary leaders responded to the ruling by threatening to end
   collaboration with the authorities. They desisted only after the
   government sent Congress a new bill to grant them political status.
   But even if the bill is passed, it may well be knocked down by the
   courts.

   Mr Uribe's critics say that this impasse reflects the improvised way
   in which the peace process has been conducted. Officials counter that
   the process was bound to be messy, and that its flaws can be corrected
   as it goes along. They point out that no other country has put so many
   people on trial while conflict continues.

   Only 44 paramilitaries (out of a potential 3,000) have begun giving
   their courtroom confessions. Some 70,000 people have applied to be
   officially registered as victims. The attorney-general's office seems
   overwhelmed, and impatience among the victims is mounting.

   When militia leaders began their confessions in December, throngs of
   victims packed into anterooms where they could watch the hearings
   through a live video feed. But as one leader after another recounted
   massacres and disappearances with no remorse, and blamed many crimes
   on long-dead leaders, disillusion has grown. "The truth that we were
   promised from all this is not coming forth," says Iván Cepeda, who
   leads a national victims' organisation. Scores of victims have
   received death threats, and at least three have been murdered this
   year.

   Whereas the government pays a stipend to the former fighters, the
   victims have yet to receive anything. Even so, the biggest fear is
   that more of the demobilised paramilitaries will return to arms and
   crime. The Supreme Court's decision could encourage that, says Gustavo
   Duncan, the author of a book on the paramilitaries. But he reckons
   that the jailed leaders have no choice but to stick with the process,
   not least because for some it is the only safeguard against
   extradition to the United States on drugs charges. For all its
   problems, the likelihood is that the peace process will stumble on.

