
   Information about Cuba's ailing leader is scarce, but speculation is
   not

   "IT'S like being in the middle of a hurricane," said one Havana
   resident, groping for a way to describe the mood in Cuba's capital
   after Fidel Castro surrendered power temporarily for the first time in
   47 years. "Everything seems totally quiet, but you know it can't
   last."

                                                                       AP
                                                                       AP

                                                                 Or both?

   There are more security patrols and the summer carnival has been
   cancelled but those are among the few signs that anything is amiss.
   Official bulletins insist that the 80-year-old leader is recovering
   after emergency gastric surgery but that it will take weeks, if not
   months, before he is ready to return to work. Meanwhile, his brother,
   Raúl, the defence minister, is in charge. Most people in the western
   hemisphere's only communist country believe what they are told.

   Yet the authorities have presented no evidence that Fidel is on the
   mend, or even that he is still alive. And Raúl has yet to appear in
   public. In their absence, rumour and speculation flourish.

   One line of speculation is that top Communist Party officials will use
   Fidel's sick leave to encourage a transition they have long thought
   necessary. Brian Latell, a former analyst from the United States'
   Central Intelligence Agency, suggests that Fidel will remain party
   chief, and thus the symbol of Cuba's revolution, but will pass on the
   presidency, which exercises day-to-day power, perhaps to Carlos Lage,
   the third most senior official, who has been acting as a de facto
   prime minister. Domingo Amuchastegui, a former Cuban intelligence
   official who left the island in 1994, agrees that Fidel is unlikely to
   return to hands-on management.

   Mr Lage shares Raúl's reformist instincts, which are to allow more
   economic but not political freedoms. The main threat to this group is
   said to be Ramiro Valdes, a hardline former interior minister ousted
   by Raúl, who now heads a financial enterprise that belongs to the
   ministry. Raúl has stayed out of the public eye, say sources close to
   the Communist Party, to avoid giving the impression that the Fidel era
   is over.

   Dissidents are lying low. Vladimir Roca, an outspoken critic, says he
   is "watching and listening". He and other dissidents have decided to
   do nothing unusual until they really know what is going on.

   That wary attitude is causing frustration in the United States, which
   has been encouraging Cuban democrats via radio and television stations
   financed by its government. American-sponsored Radio Martí boosted its
   signal this week. Cuba's government said that Cubans found watching
   American television on clandestine antennae would face three years in
   jail.

