
   A change of power in one of the Caribbean's best-run and most stable
   democracies

   IT WAS an all-night party in Barbados after the island's general
   election on January 15th. "Plenty change," a Bridgetown bar-owner
   grinned, and he wasn't just referring to the mounds of cash he was
   counting. After 13 lonely years in opposition, three election defeats
   and a series of long-running party-leadership squabbles, David
   Thompson led his Democratic Labour Party (DLP) triumphantly back to
   power, with 20 of the 30 parliamentary seats. In the previous
   election, in 2003, it won just seven seats.

   By American standards, the campaign was blissfully short. The election
   was called on December 20th, leaving just two lively weeks after the
   Christmas and new-year break to get the voters in. There is no great
   ideological gulf between Mr Thompson's party and the outgoing Barbados
   Labour Party (BLP). But from time to time Barbadians like to shake up
   the political scene. Although Owen Arthur, the BLP leader, was
   regarded as a good manager, people felt that he had become a little
   arrogant after his 13 years in power, and some of his party rather too
   comfortably settled.

   Voters also fretted over rising food prices, cost overruns on a road
   project and property prices jacked up by villa-buying foreigners. Then
   there was a row over claims by the BLP that Taiwan had funded Mr
   Thompson's campaign in exchange for a promise of diplomatic
   recognition. This was hotly denied by the DLP, anxious to avoid a rift
   with China.

   Barbados is one of the Caribbean's oldest and most stable democracies,
   consistently getting top-drawer rankings for its political and civil
   liberties. From 1639 an elected House of Assembly--not the
   British-appointed colonial governor--controlled the island's cash. The
   first mixed-race member, Samuel Jackman Prescod, won a seat in 1843.
   Universal suffrage eventually followed in 1951, and independence 15
   years later. On a visit to the island in 1859 Anthony Trollope, a
   British novelist, found it irritatingly well run.

   Barbados also tops all other Latin American and Caribbean countries in
   the UN Development Programme's human-development index. Transparency
   International, a corruption watchdog, ranks it second cleanest in the
   region, just behind Chile. In September unemployment hit an all-time
   low of 7%, down from a peak of 27% in 1993 when the DLP was last in
   power.

   "Change" (of leadership) was the DLP's campaign watchword. The new
   government, which inherits an uncomfortably big public debt, equal to
   88% of GDP, will have other changes to deal with, too. Important
   business decisions are increasingly likely to be taken in neighbouring
   Trinidad rather than Barbados. Many big local firms are already
   majority-owned by Trinidad shareholders. Now two Trinidad companies
   are fighting for control of Barbados Shipping & Trading, the island's
   biggest conglomerate.

   Sugar, the economic mainstay until the 1960s, will lose its guaranteed
   European market by 2015, and is already suffering EU price cuts. Costs
   are among the world's highest, but cane keeps the landscape in good
   order. Shutting down sugar would dent the country's confidence, too.
   Mr Arthur had proposed a new $156m sugar factory, using cane for
   electricity and biofuel, and exporting pricey premium-brand Plantation
   Reserve sugar. The DLP called the plan a "mishmash", but has yet to
   come up with a better one.

   Meanwhile, the island's medium-sized independent hotels, the backbone
   of its tourist industry, are facing rising costs and increasing
   competition from cruise ships; some have closed. High oil prices will
   push up air fares this year. Further ahead, global (over)warming may
   cut the pulling power of Barbados's tropical beaches, now attracting
   over half a million tourists a year.

   On the upside, there may be oil. In 2004 Barbados faced down Trinidad
   in a dispute over their maritime boundaries, and two years later won a
   big slice of seabed, which America's Geological Service believes may
   contain some generous deposits, though the waters are deep and the
   geology complex. A bid round for exploration rights, which has already
   sparked interest from several big oil companies, closes in April. Over
   to you, Mr Thompson.

