
   The death of a political boss, but not necessarily of the breed


   THE most powerful men in Brazilian politics tend to go by nicknames or
   initials. The president, Luiz Inácio Lula da Silva, is invariably
   called simply Lula. One of the great acronyms was Antonio Carlos
   Magalhães, or ACM, a senator who dominated the political life of the
   large north-eastern state of Bahia for half a century. To some
   Brazilians, his death on July 20th at 79 marks the end of an era--that
   of coronelismo, the rule of the old-fashioned political bosses known
   as "colonels".

   Mr Magalhães was no military man. The term comes from the habit of
   19th-century landowner-politicians of buying command of the
   national-guard unit in their locality. Muddling private with public
   interest, the colonels were particularly prevalent in the poor north
   and north-east, where they often controlled access to education and
   government jobs.

   In some ways Mr Magalhães, the "emperor of Bahia", was one of the last
   of the breed. Three times governor of the state, he strengthened his
   power base by allying with whomever was in power in Brasília. He
   supported the military regime of 1964-85. He backed democracy at the
   last minute, befriending most subsequent presidents. He served as
   minister for communications in the 1980s while owning the most
   important television station in Bahia.

   But he also presided over Bahia's industrial modernisation, persuading
   petrochemical firms and Ford to set up plants there, often with
   government help. In his lifetime, Salvador, the state capital of which
   he was once mayor, displaced Recife as the most important city in the
   north-east. He was genuinely adored by many baianos. But he was often
   dictatorial in manner and could be vengeful.

   Even before his death, his grip had begun to loosen. The premature
   death of his son, tipped as a future president, thwarted his dynastic
   hopes. He could no longer deliver Bahia's vote to whomever he chose.
   In the 2002 presidential election his favoured candidate, Ciro Gomes,
   came third in the state. Last year Mr Magalhães's party finally lost
   the state's governorship, to Lula's Workers' Party (PT).

   Other traditional bosses are in decline, too. José Sarney, a former
   president, has run the state of Maranhão and its smaller neighbour,
   Amapá, for decades. But despite backing Lula, he only scraped back as
   a senator last year. His daughter Roseana, also once touted as a
   future president, lost the election for governor of Maranhão.

   Several trends explain the weakening of the colonels. Brazilians are
   better educated and informed than ever before. Social programmes, such
   as Bolsa Família, a federal scheme that gives cash payments to the
   poorest, have made voters less dependent on the favours of the local
   political boss, while also increasing support for the PT in the
   north-east.

   But Brazil is not yet free of the influence of African-style "big
   men". In the more backward parts of the country, personality and
   patronage can still trump ideology and organisation. The party system
   is weak, with 21 different parties represented in Congress.
   Legislators regularly switch between them. In a large country, where
   each state is a single electoral constituency, name recognition is
   crucial.

   Marco Antonio Villa, a social scientist at the Federal University of
   São Carlos, sees a new type of colonel in people like Mr Gomes, a
   slick soft-left operator who is likely to run for president again in
   2010. Mr Gomes has been governor of Ceará, also in the north-east, a
   minister under two different presidents, and is now a congressman. His
   former wife is a senator and his brother is the current governor of
   Ceará.

   A political-reform bill is wending its way through Congress, but few
   expect it to produce radical change. Nevertheless, Brazilian politics
   are far more competitive than they were. The likes of Mr Gomes will
   never dominate their states in the manner of Mr Magalhães in Bahia.
   Evolution, not revolution, is slowly wiping out the Brazilian
   political boss.

