
   An embarrassment for Álvaro Uribe


   STUBBORNNESS is one of Álvaro Uribe's qualities but it can sometimes
   be a defect. When last November María Consuelo Araújo, his young
   foreign minister, was caught up in an escalating scandal about links
   between right-wing paramilitary militias and pro-government
   politicians, Colombia's president said she should keep her job. This
   week she resigned, but only after much damage to the government's
   image abroad.

   Ms Araújo has not been accused of any wrongdoing. But her brother, a
   senator, was arrested on February 15th along with four other
   politicians. Together with her father, a former minister and
   provincial governor, he is alleged to have received cash from the
   paramilitaries and to have ordered the kidnap of a political rival.

   The paramilitaries were originally formed by cattle ranchers and drug
   barons to fight extortion and kidnapping by left-wing guerrillas. They
   turned into a powerful illegal army, responsible for many atrocities.
   They took control of local politics, especially in the Araújo's home
   patch on the north coast.

   Paradoxically, the revelations about the paramilitaries' political
   ties are a result of one of Mr Uribe's successes. He persuaded the
   30,000 paramilitaries to demobilise. Some of their leaders are now
   testifying about their past activities. Uncovering the truth "is for
   the good of Colombia", says Juan Manuel Santos, the defence minister.

   But the affair comes at an awkward time for Mr Uribe's government.
   George Bush is due in Bogotá, the capital, next month to show support
   for a country that has received $4.7 billion in American aid over the
   past six years to fight drugs and insurgents. Colombian officials have
   been canvassing for nearly $4 billion more from the United States and
   $9 billion from Europe and Asia over the next six years to consolidate
   security and improve social conditions.

   Patrick Leahy, who chairs the relevant Senate appropriations
   subcommittee, says that American taxpayers deserve assurances that
   Colombia's government "has severed links to these terrorist groups".
   Mr Uribe denies that his government has ever had such links. Many in
   Washington, DC, are sceptical. "Even the Republicans are starting to
   lose faith in Uribe," says Arlene Tickner of Bogotá's Los Andes
   University.

   The new foreign minister, Fernando Araújo (no relation), escaped in
   December after six years in jungle camps as a hostage of the FARC
   guerrillas. In naming him, Mr Uribe is sending the message that his
   country remains in peril.

