
   A different Kirchner is in charge, but many of the policies remain the
   same

                                                                      AFP

                                    AFP


   AT A packed ceremony in Argentina's Congress on December 10th, Néstor
   Kirchner gave his wife, Cristina Fernández de Kirchner, a gift
   hitherto unknown in the history of marriage: his country's
   presidential sash and staff. In an improvised but fluent speech, she
   returned the compliment by lavishing praise on his achievements, and
   promising to consolidate them. She has kept many of her husband's
   ministers. But amid this seamless display of political continuity are
   hints of change ahead for Argentina.

   Ms Fernández, although a former senator and experienced politician in
   her own right, owes her elevation to her husband's decision not to
   seek a second term. In that sense, her status as Argentina's first
   elected woman president is not quite the feminist victory it appears
   (see [4]article).

   Buoyed by his popularity--the economy has expanded by nearly 50% since
   he took office in 2003--she coasted to victory in an election in
   October with the slogan "change is just beginning". In foreign
   affairs, that may be true. She has also implied that she will be more
   respectful of Argentina's democratic institutions than her sometimes
   high-handed husband. Where Mr Kirchner seemed to relish confrontation,
   she ran as a consensus-builder.

   Her biggest test will be the management of an economy that shows signs
   of overheating after its vigorous recovery from the financial collapse
   of 2001-02. That recovery owed much to high world prices for the
   country's farm exports, but Argentines give Mr Kirchner, a left-wing
   Peronist, much of the credit. Until a pre-election spending binge, he
   ran a fairly tight fiscal policy. He bullied many of the country's
   creditors into accepting a debt restructuring on tough terms. He also
   paid off the IMF in order not to have to listen to its advice,
   refounded several state companies and kept the peso cheap in order to
   promote re-industrialisation.

   Most economists reckon inflation is close to 20%, although the
   government has massaged the official figure to keep it to half that,
   as well as imposing price controls. Energy demand is close to
   outpacing supply: the last southern-hemisphere winter saw occasional
   blackouts.

   Ms Fernández said she would make "necessary corrections". In an
   attempt to boost innovation, she has created a new ministry for
   science and technology. In the past few weeks her husband has floated
   plans to raise energy tariffs and taken steps to restore the fiscal
   surplus. But it appears that Mr Kirchner's notorious price-fixer,
   Guillermo Moreno, the secretary for internal trade, will keep his job.
   "The Kirchners are Peronists," says Luis Tonelli, a columnist for
   Debate magazine. "If they have to choose between jobs and inflation,
   they'll choose jobs."

   The choice may come in wage negotiations next year. Ms Fernández
   called for a "social pact". Labour may be in no mood to compromise.
   Hugo Moyano, a powerful union leader, has given warning of strikes if
   the new president does not bless big wage rises across the board. "For
   the government, inflation will begin to matter once it matters to
   workers and businessmen," says Vladimir Werning of JPMorgan, an
   investment bank.

   Change may be more tangible in foreign policy, which bored Mr Kirchner
   but fascinates his wife. She said that Argentina would "re-engage with
   the world". She has signalled that she wants better ties with the
   United States, Europe and Brazil. In the first case, new strains may
   come from a decision by prosecutors in Florida this week to charge
   four people they claim were Venezuelan agents with plotting to conceal
   an intended $800,000 cash contribution during Argentina's election
   campaign.

   Ms Fernández is no less a nationalist than her husband. While keen to
   settle Argentina's $7 billion of defaulted debt with the Paris Club of
   creditor governments, she refuses to brook involvement by the IMF,
   which the group normally requires. She shares her husband's enthusiasm
   for Venezuela's Hugo Chávez, who buys Argentina's bonds and sells it
   fuel.

   Having handed over the sash, what will Mr Kirchner now do? He has said
   that he will devote himself to reorganising Peronism. Just as she was
   an influential adviser during his presidency, doubtless he will be
   too. He came to office with "more unemployed than votes", as his wife
   recalled. But at least the country was already on the rebound in 2003.
   Ms Fernández may find her husband a hard act to follow. She may have
   to steer her course between a slowdown in the world economy as well as
   accelerating inflation at home. Unlike him, she starts her presidency
   stronger and more popular than she may end it.

