
   The post-Castro era inches closer 

   "MY fundamental duty is not to cling to public offices, still less to
   obstruct the advance of younger people, but to contribute experience
   and ideas." With these words, read out at his request on state
   television on December 17th, Fidel Castro hinted that he might step
   down permanently from his country's presidency. With this Cuba's
   elderly and convalescent leader seemed to open a public discussion
   over who might succeed him.

   In July 2006 Mr Castro temporarily turned over his powers to his
   younger brother, Raúl, before undergoing abdominal surgery. Since then
   Cuba has been edging towards life without the man who has led the
   country since 1959. Raúl Castro, who heads a collective leadership,
   has launched an "open debate" on economic reforms. In the medium term
   these seem certain to involve a greater role for markets and foreign
   investment in the state-dominated economy.

   Doubts over Fidel's role have meant that change has so far proceeded
   at a glacial pace. Officials say that he has resumed work. This has
   included occasional meetings with foreign dignitaries and regular
   newspaper columns on topics ranging from "Bush, hunger and death" to
   climate change. He is said to keeps tabs on leading officials by
   telephone.

   Fidel was recently nominated as a candidate in an election for the
   National Assembly due on January 20th. In March the president will be
   chosen for a five-year term from among the assembly's members. Despite
   popular discontent over shortages, low wages and corruption, there has
   been no sign of any significant challenge to Communist Party rule.

   The next three months will thus reveal Cuba's immediate political
   future. Some believe that Raúl, who is himself 76, does not want the
   presidency, and that the job may go to Carlos Lage, the de facto prime
   minister, who oversaw liberalising economic reforms during the 1990s
   (some of them since reversed). If that has already been decided, more
   reforms may even be unveiled before the election.

   But, as so often, Fidel seems to want to keep Cubans guessing. He
   closed his televised message with a reference to Oscar Niemeyer, a
   Brazilian architect who turned 100 on December 15th and who is still
   working. "One has to be constant to the end," Fidel wrote approvingly.
   But perhaps constancy need not involve active political leadership.

