
   Big university, big scientific ambitions

   WITH some 160,000 undergraduate students and 21,000 graduate students,
   Mexico's National Autonomous University (UNAM) is the largest in Latin
   America and among the largest in the world. It has also long had a
   reputation as being unmanageable: in 1999 its main campus was occupied
   for months by students protesting against a timid attempt to introduce
   fees. Nevertheless, UNAM is the only Latin American university to be
   ranked by Britain's Times Higher Education Supplement in the top 200
   in the world.

   Last month UNAM chose a new rector, José Narro, a doctor who was
   previously head of the university's medical school. Dr Narro's
   selection is important not just to the academy, but to Mexico. As Olga
   Hansberg, a member of UNAM's board of governors, says, "What happens
   in the country is reflected in UNAM, and vice-versa." The institution
   matters not just because of its size but also because it was, for
   years, an engine of social mobility, a place where students from
   provincial secondary schools could mix with the children of
   politicians and those of the metropolitan middle class.

   In recent years, UNAM's role has become less central, as decent
   competitors have emerged in the social sciences and low-quality
   private diploma mills have proliferated in the provinces. Nowadays,
   many of the children of the elite head to the capital's top private
   universities to study economics or political science. But UNAM remains
   the only educational institution in the country that does high-quality
   basic research in the sciences.

   UNAM owes this distinction largely to the fact that it has control
   over its own budget, although this comes from the federal budget. Dr
   Narro was chosen by the university's board of governors, free from the
   influence of the national education bureaucracy and the powerful,
   reactionary teachers' union that controls primary education in Mexico.

   Although Mexico's wages remain far below those in the United States,
   it has been bleeding manufacturing jobs to Asia partly because it lags
   in innovation. Promising signs exist: Mexico recently inaugurated what
   aspires to be a world-class genomics research institute. And the
   Tecnológico, a private university based in the northern industrial
   city of Monterrey and specialising in engineering and technology, has
   planted campuses across the country. But, as its rector says, its
   research is focused on practical applications for business.

   Places to do basic research outside UNAM remain few and far between.
   As the pre-eminent voice in Mexican higher education, it is now Dr
   Narro's task not only to improve his own university, but to try to get
   others to compete with him. His primary patient is in relatively good
   shape; it is the other patients, outside his "university city", who
   need attention.

