
   Malnutrition amid growing plenty


   KICKING a football around a dusty lot, Judin Quicaño looks like any
   other boy of four. But stand him against a standard growth chart and
   he is almost a head shorter than he should be at his age. His mother
   says that is just his natural build. Health officials say he is among
   nearly 30% of Peruvian children in his age group who suffer from
   chronic malnutrition. The figure rises to 90% in places such as
   Lliupapuquio, a village in Apurímac department in Peru's heavily
   Indian southern Andes where Judin lives.

   The picture is similar in neighbouring Bolivia and Ecuador. What makes
   the stunting of children's lives and bodies more shocking in Peru's
   case is that the country is enjoying a boom. The GDP expanded by 8.3%
   last year alone, and is some 45% bigger today than it was in 2001.
   Many of the poor benefit from social programmes. The government spends
   around $250m a year on food-aid schemes alone, which reach
   three-quarters of families in poor rural areas.

   So why does malnutrition remain so prevalent? One reason is that in
   the Andes it generally manifests itself as stunted growth. Many
   Peruvians, often including the parents of the children concerned,
   believe that people of Andean Indian descent are naturally short.
   Malnutrition is thus "invisible" because the children are not
   "super-thin or dehydrated", says Ian Walker, a social-protection
   specialist at the World Bank. But children who do not eat well in
   their first two years will face learning difficulties.

   Although governments have increased spending on social programmes,
   they have done little to improve their effectiveness. In Apurímac,
   mayors complain of duplication, corruption and lack of local control.
   But the biggest problem is that economic growth is not reaching many
   parts of the Andes. Official figures put poverty in Apurímac at 74.8%
   in 2006, having increased slightly since 2004. In such places, a lack
   of transport, education and health care all conspire against progress.

   When he took office in July 2006, President Alan García pledged to cut
   the incidence of child malnutrition by eight percentage points by the
   end of his term in 2011. The World Bank and other development agencies
   are trying to help. Last year the World Bank approved a $150m loan for
   streamlining social programmes and to enhance their impact on
   malnutrition, health and schooling, especially in Andean Indian
   villages.

   There are reasons for hope. In Santa María de Chicmo, a district in
   Apurímac, the incidence of malnourishment in children has been cut
   from 80% to 30% since 2000. Most of the credit belongs to a scheme
   pioneered by Kusi Warma, an NGO whose name means "Happy Child" in
   Quechua, and whose work is backed by the municipal council and Unicef,
   the United Nations' children fund. It revolves around a small centre
   where new mothers bring their children for pre-school education and
   information about nutrition and health. The task facing Peru is to
   replicate this success, and go beyond it.

