
   Getting ready for a post-Castro bonanza

   THE American businessman at this month's international trade fair in
   Havana was full of excitement about the communist island's investment
   prospects as its long-serving president ails. "It's a perfect storm,"
   he enthused: "Fidel will soon be gone, and a Democratic president will
   be in the White House. Bye-bye embargo!"

   Few of the foreign investors who have spent years struggling to make
   money in Cuba, caught between American trade restrictions, communist
   bureaucracy and preferential deals for key allies such as China and
   Venezuela, see it quite so simply. But even the most jaded are
   wondering whether things might be looking up. Hopes have been raised
   by news of a huge deal in the making. It could be the shape of things
   to come.

   After two years of negotiations, plans are moving forward for Dubai
   Ports World, a partly state-owned company in the United Arab Emirates,
   to invest $250m in converting the decrepit port in Mariel, just west
   of Havana, into a modern container facility. A formal feasibility
   study has been commissioned.

   The choice of Mariel, one of the closest points in Cuba to the United
   States, is significant. The port is best known as the setting for a
   massive boatlift in 1980 when, over a period of six months, 125,000
   Cubans set off in flimsy rafts as Fidel Castro turned a temporary
   blind eye to those wanting to leave his poor one-party state. They
   were picked up and taken to the United States by a flotilla of
   American yachts.

   Mariel appeals to international port operators for the same
   reason--its proximity to the United States. "This deal isn't just
   about getting goods to Cuba," said one analyst who had studied the
   project. "It's about getting into the US market." American ports are
   close to capacity, and environmental restrictions make any big
   expansion of existing terminals unlikely. In a post-embargo world,
   Mariel, which is expected to be open for business by 2012, would be a
   well-positioned hub. Goods could be transferred from the big container
   ships arriving at the port to smaller vessels which could then reach
   dozens of harbours in the southern United States.

   Dubai Ports World refuses to comment on the deal. But there can be
   little doubt that the company is eager to gain a foothold, if not
   actually in the United States, then as close as possible to it. Last
   year it was forced to abandon plans to operate six big ports in the
   United States after Congress expressed security concerns. Although the
   United Arab Emirates is considered a close American ally, two of the
   hijackers involved in the September 11th 2001 terrorist attacks were
   UAE nationals.

   Does Cuba's acceptance of the Mariel project mean that the country's
   top brass is beginning to plan seriously for the day when the American
   embargo might end? That might appear premature, given that the Bush
   administration has explicitly ruled out unrestricted trading with a
   Cuban government under Raul Castro, Fidel's brother and presumed
   successor, and that only one American presidential candidate (Chris
   Dodd, a Democratic outsider) has called for a complete end to the
   embargo.

   All the same, there is evidence that Cuban officials do believe that
   the days of the bloqueo (as they refer to the embargo) are numbered.
   The Cuban ministries that deal with foreign investment, known by their
   Orwellian abbreviations of MINVEC and MINFAR, have recently been
   putting the word out to foreign investors that tenders are welcome for
   a raft of projects. Theme parks, super-yacht marinas, golf courses,
   even airlines--all apparently geared to a future American market
   too--feature prominently on the list.

   An end to the embargo could provide a bonanza to investors with assets
   in Cuba that would appeal to American corporations. The paltry returns
   from, say, a share in a Havana hotel would be dwarfed by the value
   that could be realised by selling that stake to an American hotel
   chain. "That's the game plan," admitted one Havana-based businessman.
   "But," he added, "so is patience."

