
   Socialism, but for a while only at the speed of a donkey 




   SMARTING from his first-ever electoral defeat last month, Hugo Chávez
   has begun the year by shifting his leftist revolution into lower gear.
   "The main motor seized up, so we'll have to go by donkey instead," he
   said on his weekly television show, "Aló Presidente" ("Hello
   President"), on January 6th. The "motor" was a reform of the
   constitution aimed at turning Venezuela into a socialist state and
   giving the president the chance to stay in power indefinitely. By a
   narrow margin voters rejected this in a referendum on December 2nd,
   leaving the revolution coasting in neutral.

   "I'm obliged to apply the brakes," said the president, admitting that
   his mistake had been to get too far ahead of what Venezuelans were
   prepared to accept. With five years of his presidential term still
   left, he has the luxury of reconsidering the method while retaining
   the same goals. So he has announced a period of what he calls "the
   three Rs"-- the "revision, rectification and relaunching" of the
   revolution.

   He might have added another requirement: rapid results. In October the
   country will vote again, this time for mayors and governors. With 22
   out of the 24 states currently in chavista hands, the president has a
   lot to lose. To avoid another reverse he needs to address the problems
   that, by common consent, lay behind his defeat.

   The first is governmental incompetence. The revolution has failed to
   tackle a long list of problems, from crime to the cost of living. Mr
   Chávez's response was to make a dozen ministerial changes in early
   January. Out went the vice-president, Jorge Rodríguez, an outspoken
   radical, who was in charge of the referendum campaign. His
   replacement, Ramón Carrizales, is a retired colonel who quietly ran
   the housing ministry. Unlike Mr Rodríguez, who was also overseeing the
   creation of Mr Chávez's new political party, the Unified Socialist
   Party of Venezuela (PSUV), Mr Carrizales will focus "exclusively on
   government", the president said.

   Another big problem is the demoralisation of Mr Chávez's own movement.
   Last year the president abruptly announced that he was creating the
   PSUV as the "sole party" of the revolution. But three allied parties
   refused to join; one of them has moved into opposition. The PSUV is
   due to be formally launched on January 12th. But squabbling between
   its factions is intensifying in the run-up to the local elections.
   Those with ambitions to succeed Mr Chávez after the next presidential
   election in 2012 know that the best launch pad is to become governor
   of an important state. Here, too, the president has chosen to ease up.
   He has acknowledged what was previously anathema: the existence of
   legitimate internal "currents" within the movement. And he has dropped
   his insistence that only those prepared to join the party can be part
   of the revolution.

   The third pressing issue is the economy. Inflation soared to 22.5%
   last year, almost double the government's target. Staples such as
   milk, cooking oil and flour are in short supply. On January 1st the
   government launched a new currency, the "strong bolívar", cutting
   three zeroes from its predecessor. Officials presented this as part of
   a plan to tame inflation. But since it has not been backed by policy
   changes, its main effect is just to simplify accounting.

   The new finance minister, Rafael Isea, admits that the government
   needs to stimulate food production, which has failed to match growing
   demand prompted by an oil-fuelled economic boom. After the referendum
   his predecessor promised a more "flexible" approach to price controls,
   which the private sector sees as the main cause of the shortages. What
   this means in practice has yet to be spelled out.

   A big shift towards more market-friendly policies is unlikely. Mr Isea
   is a former army lieutenant, with a limited background in economics.
   The new planning minister, Haiman El Troudi, is a youngish ideologue,
   as committed to central planning as his predecessor, the president's
   elderly economic guru, Jorge Giordani. Mr Chávez's call for alliances
   with the private sector and the middle class on "Aló Presidente" was
   broadcast from a newly inaugurated "socialist training school",
   against a backdrop featuring a portrait of Fidel Castro, Cuba's
   communist president.

   Indeed, Mr Chávez announced that he was launching a fresh "socialist
   offensive". He promised that applying the brakes to the revolution in
   no way implied "surrender, moderation or conservatism". He even
   announced the creation of a food production and distribution division
   of the state oil company, Petróleos de Venezuela. Mr Chávez
   acknowledges going too fast--but not in the wrong direction.

