
   Pointers to a coming liberalisation


   "WE HAVE a system in which anything you do is either forbidden or
   compulsory," complains Miguel, an academic and a member of Cuba's
   ruling Communist Party. "Perhaps we need to change that to become more
   efficient." He notes angrily that what he earns in a month, a trainee
   waiter can pick up in tips in a day in the island's tourist hotels. It
   is a common complaint, and only one of many. But now it is Cuba's
   government that is encouraging everyone to grumble.

                                                                  Reuters
                                                                  Reuters

                                             Grumbling for the revolution

   Though independent economists doubt official claims that Cuba's
   economy is growing at around 10% a year, they agree that it is
   expanding again after a decade of privation. That is mainly thanks to
   aid from Venezuela and trade with China. There are fewer power cuts
   and more buses on the streets. But wages are still below their level
   of 1989. Food is rationed or expensive and medicines are often in
   short supply. This week the education minister admitted that low pay
   was prompting an "exodus" of teachers from schools.

   Raúl Castro, who took over as Cuba's acting president in July 2006
   when his elder brother, Fidel, had intestinal surgery, seems to be
   aware of the popular frustration. Acknowledging that the economy
   needed "structural and conceptual changes", in July he called for an
   "open debate" on what to do. Nothing should be off the agenda, he
   insisted.

   The debate has taken place at local branches of the Communist Party,
   as well as trade unions and other mass organisations. At each meeting,
   a notetaker has recorded without attribution the criticisms and
   suggestions. Over the next two months the results will be analysed.
   Cuba-watchers reckon that, after a slow start, the debate has been
   franker and more wide-ranging than the last such exercise held in the
   early 1990s, after the collapse of the Soviet Union, the island's
   sponsor.

   Apart from petty corruption and slovenly officials, the main gripes
   have been low pay, rising income inequality, inefficiency, waste and
   asphyxiating bureaucracy. Loyal Communist militants have joined
   ordinary people in criticising defects in the prized health and
   education systems, including Cuba's policy of sending some 25,000
   doctors and other specialists to support Hugo Chávez's "Bolivarian
   Revolution" in Venezuela. (Mr Chávez pays Cuba some $3 billion-4
   billion a year, partly in oil, for their services.)

   How will Raúl Castro respond to all this? Unlike Fidel, he is thought
   to favour the course pursued by China and Vietnam, in which markets
   and private investment have been combined with Communist political
   control. Even before the debate began, government economists had been
   studying measures such as allowing more self-employment and private or
   co-operative ownership of small and medium-sized businesses, as well
   as reforming land tenure and freeing agricultural markets.

   Under Raúl Castro the government has already been a bit more welcoming
   of foreign investment. He has also said that wages need to rise,
   though that will have to be accompanied by changes in prices and the
   official exchange rate.

   How much will really change? The first announcements are expected by
   the end of December. They are likely to include a bit more scope for
   private initiative and for markets and prices, but all within an
   economy and society still dominated by the state. Officials insist
   that what Fidel Castro calls the "pure poison" of "neo-liberal
   formulae" will not be swallowed. The official mantra is that rather
   than copying any foreign model, policy changes will comprise "a Cuban
   response to the Cuban reality". As long as Fidel continues to hover in
   the background--in a recent video with Mr Chávez he seemed
   stronger--he may inhibit any real liberalisation.

   But the direction seems clear. Even some of the dissidents on the
   island, such as Oscar Espinosa Chepe, an economist, foresee gradual
   economic liberalisation, though others are more sceptical. "A turning
   point has been reached," says Anicia García, director of the
   University of Havana's Centre for the Study of the Cuban Economy. Most
   Cubans seem to think so, and even more hope so.

