
                                                            Claudio Munoz

                               Claudio Munoz

   Stephen Harper's minority Conservative government is in need of an
   overhaul


   JUNE has not been a good month for Stephen Harper, the Canadian prime
   minister. At the G8 summit in Germany his record on foreign aid was
   singled out for special criticism by two Irish rock stars with
   planet-saving ambitions, Bono and Bob Geldof. His return to Canada was
   blighted by the loss of a Conservative MP, bounced from the party's
   caucus for opposing the budget, and by a confrontation caught on
   camera with an 80-year-old widow, who accused him of lying about
   extending veterans' benefits. The government's much-vaunted green plan
   was denounced as ineffectual by a prominent think-tank usually
   sympathetic to the Conservative cause. And as Parliament limped toward
   its summer recess this week, two angry premiers descended on Ottawa to
   castigate the prime minister for supposedly breaking his word to them
   on financial transfers to their provinces.

   It is a far cry from six months ago, when Mr Harper was riding high in
   the polls and appeared poised to call an election that would turn his
   governing Conservative minority into a majority. After one year in
   power, he had largely kept five narrow campaign promises and could
   convincingly argue the need for a new mandate. But the chance
   disappeared as public support for the Conservatives, which peaked
   after the launch of a generous budget in March, quickly dropped back
   into minority territory, where it remains.

   Such a litany of woes might be expected to worry a party that holds
   only 124 of the 308 seats in the House of Commons (there are 100
   Liberals, 49 Bloc Québécois, 29 New Democrats, four independents and
   two vacant seats). Yet Mr Harper continues to exude confidence.

   There are two main reasons for this. One is that although the wheels
   appear to be coming off the Tory motor, which was only ever designed
   for a short race, the opposition parties are having trouble even
   starting their engines. The second is the insouciance of ordinary
   Canadians, who are benefiting from a strong economy and record low
   unemployment. There is really not a lot troubling the nation, says
   Darrell Bricker, a pollster; Canadians have never been more
   optimistic.

   This is not what the Liberals want to hear. They continue to hammer
   the government for its handling of Canada's military mission in
   Afghanistan, and its weak plan to clean up the environment. But they
   are hamstrung by their own record. It was a Liberal government that
   first sent troops to Afghanistan in 2002. They were also responsible
   for a much-criticised deal in which prisoners captured by Canadian
   forces were handed over to Afghan troops and then allegedly tortured.
   Their position is equally weak on the environmental front. Having
   signed the Kyoto protocol, they did little to meet its stringent
   targets for emissions reductions.

   Indeed, all three opposition leaders have problems. Stéphane Dion,
   chosen by the Liberals last December, remains largely unknown outside
   his Quebec base. Gilles Duceppe of the Bloc Québécois is suffering
   from a self-inflicted blow after announcing his departure for
   provincial politics this spring, only to change his mind within 24
   hours. And Jack Layton of the leftist New Democrats seems powerless to
   stop an erosion of party support in favour of the Greens, even though
   this is a fringe party that has yet to get a member of parliament.

   Although all this is grist for the political mill on Parliament Hill,
   it seems to leave the rest of Canada virtually untouched. Consumer
   spending remains strong, with house prices shattering all records in
   May. Unemployment at 6.1% is at a 33-year low. Even the beleaguered
   manufacturing industry, battered by a high dollar and competition with
   China, has staged a rebound. The economy is "worrisomely good", says
   Philip Cross, chief economic analyst at Statistics Canada, the
   national statistical agency.

   Foreign investors appear to share that opinion and are snapping up
   Canadian companies in record numbers. This has prompted a debate about
   whether corporate Canada is being "hollowed out". Many wonder whether
   Canada's corporate bosses are sufficiently aggressive. But even this
   debate is taken as a sign of economic strength; only good times allow
   the luxury of navel-gazing.

   With an early election in no one's interest, the government has no
   choice but to set a new course for the long haul. That involves making
   peace with the provinces and those segments of the business community
   who feel bruised by unexpected tax measures in the last budget. It
   also requires a new plan of action to replace the former five
   priorities.

   Hugh Segal, the Conservative senator who helped co-ordinate the last
   election campaign, is sceptical about the need for grand visions. What
   is required, he says, are policies to address the big challenges like
   immigration, trade, corporate tax and the environment. Tax cuts in
   particular would reassure the government's core supporters, based
   mainly in the western provinces, that the administration they helped
   to elect still believes in smaller government and lower taxes. Tory
   efforts to win votes in Quebec by lavishing money on the province and
   promoting green policies have led to disillusionment among some
   westerners, who have long felt estranged from the central government.

   The Tories probably had these supporters in mind when they decided to
   sponsor a racing car on Canada's NASCAR circuit this summer. Although
   not environmentally friendly--the cars guzzle petrol--the sport
   appeals to the ordinary working Canadians whose interests Mr Harper
   frequently invokes. Perhaps the prime minister will even attend.
   Watching a finely tuned engine whiz around the track might inspire him
   to rev up his own sputtering government machine.

