
   Too much confronting and voting, too little governing

   ON TAKING office as president last year, Evo Morales, a radical
   socialist of Andean Indian descent, promised to "refound" Bolivia on
   more democratic lines by means of a new constitution. But far from
   offering Bolivia a new start, the constitutional rewrite threatens to
   prolong a political confrontation that has seen two presidents
   overthrown since 2003.

   At a marathon 16-hour session held at a university in the highland
   city of Oruro on December 9th, a rump of the constituent assembly (164
   of its 255 members, most supporters of Mr Morales) rubber-stamped all
   of the 411 clauses of the new charter (bar one on landholding). But
   the opposition boycotted the session; it claims the document is
   illegal, since it was not approved by the required two-thirds majority
   of the assembly. Legal or not, the government's plan is to submit the
   document to a referendum next year.

   Mr Morales's followers say the new constitution will give more rights
   to indigenous Bolivians. It recognises no fewer than 37 official
   languages and grants autonomy to indigenous communities. They call the
   opposition a racist "oligarchy".

   Only a score of articles are controversial (though others may prove to
   be expensive). Opponents worry in particular about the weakening of
   property rights and a greater role for the state in the economy; about
   giving traditional, community justice equal status to the formal
   courts; and about judges being popularly elected rather than being
   appointed by a two-thirds majority of Congress as at present. They
   also want more explicit guarantees of regional autonomy.

   Narrow though the differences seem, the constitution is only part of a
   broader political battle between two Bolivias: the poorer, mainly
   Indian western highlands still revere Mr Morales, while the opposition
   is led by the regional prefects of the more prosperous eastern
   departments. They accuse the president of stirring up racial conflict
   in a country where many people have been happy enough to define
   themselves as mestizo (of mixed race).

   The opposition has had the upper hand for much of the past few months.
   Through political miscalculation, Mr Morales has driven the
   departments of Cochabamba and Chuquisaca into the opposition camp;
   even the prefect of La Paz was critical of the way the constitution
   was approved. Five regional governments plan unilaterally to declare
   autonomy on December 15th.

   The opposition also objects to the government's efforts to remove
   three of the five judges on the Constitutional Tribunal, and to Mr
   Morales's reliance on Venezuela's Hugo Chávez, who has provided the
   government with cash and advisers. On December 6th a mob stoned a
   Venezuelan aircraft which landed at Riberalta, in the northern jungle.

   But some of the prefects, too, seem to be overplaying their hand, by
   threatening separatism. "The government has to choose between
   autonomous departments within the nation, or new countries for
   neighbours," says Mario Cossío, the prefect of Tarija. Along with his
   colleagues from Santa Cruz, Beni and Cochabamba, Mr Cossío went to
   Washington, DC, earlier this month to press the Organisation of
   American States to intervene. This has annoyed the armed forces.

   Mr Morales has responded by challenging the opposition to a sort of
   duel. He is proposing recall referendums for himself and the prefects.
   One way or another, Bolivians may have a lot of voting to do in 2008.
   That may be an effort to distract attention from everyday problems,
   such as fuel shortages (caused by mismanagement by the state oil
   company), rising inflation and a lack of jobs. Mr Morales enjoyed
   widespread sympathy at home and abroad when he took office. He risks
   squandering much of that by seeking confrontation rather than the
   political consensus he needs to improve the lot of poorer Bolivians.

