
   Another hostage debacle


   FOR four days, several Venezuelan helicopters and an international
   reception committee including Néstor Kirchner, Argentina's former
   president, and Oliver Stone, a Hollywood filmmaker, waited at the
   airport in Villavicencio, a town in the Colombian lowlands, for the
   left-wing guerrillas of the FARC to fulfil a promise to release three
   of the hostages they have held for years. In Caracas, Hugo Chávez,
   Venezuela's leftist president, to whom the FARC had made the pledge,
   stood by with the captives' relatives. But this bizarre show ended
   without a denouement on New Year's Eve, and with Mr Chávez and his
   entourage embarrassed.

   The FARC told him they could not hand over the three
   hostages--Consuelo González and Clara Rojas, both politicians, and Ms
   Rojas's three year-old son, Emmanuel, born in captivity--because of
   nearby operations by the Colombian army designed to sabotage the
   release.

   Álvaro Uribe, Colombia's president, flew to Villavicencio to insist
   that the army had stood aside. The FARC were lying, he said: its
   commanders aborted the release when they found out that they no longer
   held Emmanuel, whose father was a guerrilla. Officials believe that
   they have located the boy in Bogotá, and say he was handed over for
   foster care in an isolated jungle town in 2005. They are carrying out
   DNA tests to confirm this. If these prove the government's contention,
   the FARC have made a fool of Mr Chávez, as well as themselves.

   In all the FARC hold some 750 hostages. They want to swap 45 of them,
   including Ingrid Betancourt, a politician of dual Colombian and French
   nationality, and three American defence contractors, for jailed
   guerrillas. But they have demanded that the government remove troops
   from two municipalities to allow talks. Mr Uribe, whose unbending
   policies have improved security in Colombia, refuses to do this.

   Pressed both by Colombians and by France's president, Nicolas Sarkozy,
   to strike a deal, Mr Uribe in August accepted the mediation of Mr
   Chávez, only to reject it again in November because of the Venezuelan
   leader's political grandstanding. He may feel vindicated in his
   mistrust of the guerrillas and of his neighbour. But the fate of the
   hostages will continue to dog him.

