
   Better times sap the will to reform, among government and opposition
   alike

                                                            Peter Schrank

                               Peter Schrank


   THESE are strange times in Brazil. Every morning, the country's main
   newspapers bring fresh instalments in a slew of corruption scandals
   lapping around the government of President Luiz Inácio Lula da Silva.
   The latest one involves the president of the senate, Renan Calheiros,
   a Lula ally. He faces widespread calls to resign over allegations that
   a lobbyist for a construction firm made regular payments to a
   journalist with whom he had an affair and a child. In another case,
   involving illegal slot-machines, federal police questioned one of
   Lula's brothers over alleged influence-peddling.

   The government seems trapped in torpidity. Six months into his second
   term, Lula has just completed his cabinet, adding a 37th minister--one
   for "strategic planning". But what are all these ministers for? The
   government's agenda is unambitious, and its reaction to events often
   tardy and fumbling. Take the chaos that has gripped Brazil's airports
   since October as a result of go-slows by disgruntled air-traffic
   controllers. Marta Suplicy, the tourism minister, seemed to sum up the
   official stance when, to much outrage, she suggested that travellers
   should "relax and enjoy" the long delays. On June 22nd the government
   finally sacked 14 controllers--an action it could have taken months
   ago.

   Brazilians often gripe that their politicians, ensconced in Brasília,
   live in pampered isolation from everyday realities. Yet perhaps it is
   the newspapers, for all the polished competence of their
   investigations, which are living in a bubble. They are read by the
   few: Folha de São Paulo, the biggest-selling daily, shifts only
   300,000 copies in a country of 190m people. Meanwhile, the average
   Brazilian is rather content, less interested in the television news
   than the soap opera that follows it. Scandals notwithstanding, the
   president is hugely popular. In São Paulo's gritty periphery "everyone
   loves Lula," says Afonso Gonçalves, who owns a small supermarket in
   the suburb of São Bernardo, where the president was once a trade-union
   leader. "He focused on the poor. He's the people's president."

   It is not hard to spot the reasons for the public mood. In many ways,
   Brazil is doing better than it has for a generation. Inflation is low
   and economic growth is steadily rising. Aloizio Mercadante, who chairs
   the Senate's economic-affairs committee, reels off many other positive
   numbers: the current account is in surplus; the fall in the public
   debt is ahead of target; the Central Bank's benchmark interest rate
   has fallen from 27.6% in 2002 to 12% today; total wages in the economy
   have grown by 8% over the past year; investment is up 7% over the same
   period; and consumption has risen for 15 consecutive quarters.

   Brazil is benefiting hugely from high world prices for its commodity
   exports and abundant global liquidity, as well as from the economic
   reforms of Lula's predecessor, Fernando Henrique Cardoso. "Lula is a
   lucky man," says Maílson da Nóbrega, a former finance minister. But he
   adds that Lula has contributed to his own good fortune: he kept Mr
   Cardoso's fiscal and monetary policies and gave the Central Bank
   operational independence. By not hesitating to raise interest rates
   when inflation threatened, the bank's governor, Henrique Meirelles,
   has won investors' trust. That, together with the export boom, has
   brought a steady appreciation of the real (see chart).

   The strong currency has helped to boost purchasing power, especially
   that of poorer Brazilians for whom lower food prices are a particular
   boon (as is a government anti-poverty programme that reaches 11m
   families). But the currency's strength has some industrialists
   grumbling; the real is overvalued by 20%, argues Paulo Skaf, the head
   of the São Paulo federation of industry. Some Brazilian firms have
   responded by opening factories abroad, from China to Argentina. The
   government this month offered cheap credit to producers of shoes,
   textiles and furniture who are struggling in the face of Chinese
   competition.

   Mr Skaf and others argue that the real's strength underlines the case
   for structural reforms--of taxes, pension, labour laws and
   infrastructure--in order to cut the cost of doing business. Brazil is
   still growing more slowly than the world economy. Without reform, the
   sustainable rate of growth is no more than 4% a year, many economists
   say. As Mr Cardoso puts it: "we have to compete not with our past but
   with our competitors."

   The government's response is, in essence, that it does not believe in
   reform for reform's sake. Franklin Martins, the president's press
   secretary, argues that Brazil can grow at up to 5.5% a year without
   further reforms. Any change to the labour laws that would take away
   rights from those Brazilians who work in the formal economy is "not a
   priority", he says. Pension reform is, but only for new workers. He
   adds that tax reform may be possible in two years' time, when the
   government should need less money to pay its debts.

   This may make for mediocre economics but it is astute politics. Even
   the opposition has lost much of its reformist impulse. Mr Cardoso's
   Party of Brazilian Social Democracy (PSDB) has been disarmed by Lula's
   adoption of many of its economic and social policies. Its former
   coalition partner, the (conservative) Party of the Liberal Front, has
   changed its name to the Democrats as part of a stampede for the middle
   ground of Brazilian politics. The opposition's attempt to make
   corruption the issue in last year's presidential election rebounded:
   most Brazilians like and trust Lula, if not all of his followers.
   Besides, as life improves, people are paying less attention to
   corruption and the legal formalities of public life, laments Mr
   Cardoso.

   In the medium term, the chance of further reform may depend on the
   PSDB, which under Mr Cardoso laid the foundations of economic
   stability and a stronger democracy in the 1990s. The party has two
   plausible candidates for the next presidential election in 2010 in
   José Serra and Aécio Neves, respectively the governors of São Paulo
   and Minas Gerais. But it now lacks a programme. "We have a good chance
   to be a governing party again, but to do what?" asks Mr Cardoso. He
   says the PSDB needs to be less scared of advocating modernisation,
   reform and further privatisation.

   Lula's Workers' Party lacks a strong candidate to follow the
   president, who under the constitution cannot run in 2010 (but might be
   able to in 2014). For now, however, Lula stands supreme in Brazil.
   Rather than governing, he reigns above party while "Brazil is on
   automatic pilot," says Gaudêncio Torquato, a political consultant in
   São Paulo. Unlike some of its would-be air travellers, at least it has
   taken off.

