
   A police anti-graft show


   THE biggest celebrity in Brazil these days is not a football star or a
   telenovela heroine but the federal police force. In a string of
   spectacular operations with melodramatic names, the police have
   recently caught judges taking bribes to keep gambling halls in
   business, congressmen arranging the purchase of ambulances at inflated
   prices and a retailer smuggling in luxury goods. The latest is
   "Operation Razor", an investigation into fraudulent public works that
   has cost the energy minister his job, implicated a dozen legislators,
   embarrassed several state governors and now threatens Renan Calheiros,
   the president of the Senate, an important ally of President Luiz
   Inácio Lula da Silva.

   All this makes Brazil look ever-more corrupt. But it may be simply
   that the authorities are getting better at detecting the rot. Lula's
   government lost its corruption-fighting credibility two years ago,
   when it emerged that his Workers' Party was paying bribes in exchange
   for votes in Congress. But also on his watch the Federal Police have
   turned tigerish, often to the government's embarrassment. Operation
   Razor has implicated nine parties, most of them Lula's allies. The
   government's audit watchdog, the Controladoria-Geral da União (CGU),
   has been strengthened. "This government seems to be more corrupt
   because it uncovered the muck," Jorge Hage, the CGU's chief, claimed
   recently.

   Operation Razor was a typical Federal-Police production, using tapped
   telephones and hidden-camera footage to accuse politicians, officials
   and businessmen of directing public contracts to a builder with a
   penchant for overcharging and leaving projects unfinished. Rather than
   deliver electricity to the poor, the firm allegedly left them in the
   dark; an unfinished bridge shelters an al fresco pool hall in the
   northeastern state of Maranhão.

   Such sting operations may be dramatic, but sadly the courts are not
   matching the police's vigour. No one accused of selling over-priced
   ambulances or paying stipends to congressmen has been convicted.
   Scandals trigger a flurry of temporary arrests--more than 4,000 in
   Federal Police operations since 2003. After that, suspects can count
   on Brazil's overburdened and inefficient judiciary to keep them out of
   jail.

   The costs of corruption are huge. One study found that in districts
   with fewer than 450,000 inhabitants--90% of the total--a tenth of the
   money transferred by the federal government was gobbled up by graft.
   The latest scandal may slow the government's ambitious infrastructure
   spending programme, centred on energy projects. The weakening of Mr
   Calheiros dents the government's influence in the Senate, where its
   majority is slim. "This is starting to take over the congressional
   agenda," says Alexandre Marinis of Mosaico Economia Política, a
   consultancy.

   With Congress lie some of the solutions as well as much of the
   problem. It is rethinking the practice of allowing congressmen and
   parties to insert pet projects into the budget, which the executive
   can then approve as a way to buy legislative support. Some want a
   reform of politics to make congressmen more accountable to voters and
   to ban private donations in election campaigns. There are calls for a
   law to implement the constitutional right to freedom of information.

   Even the Federal Police has not emerged unscathed from its own
   investigations. Two senior officers were asked to step down
   temporarily this week after allegations that they had interfered in
   earlier inquiries that threatened their colleagues. Details of
   Operation Razor were leaked to the press, some via a DVD with the
   soundtrack of "The Godfather". Congress is mulling ways to guarantee
   the secrecy of such investigations. The backlash may dim the Federal
   Police's star power.

