
                                                                   Corbis

                                   Corbis

   How to reform the flawed behemoth that is the world's sixth-biggest
   oil producer

   CANTARELL, in the Gulf of Mexico, was once the world's biggest
   offshore oilfield, holding over 35 billion barrels of the black stuff.
   Now, after nearly three decades, it is running out. At its peak in
   2004 it produced 2.1m barrels of oil per day (b/d), making up 60% of
   Mexico's total output. That figure has already fallen by more than
   500,000 b/d and could fall by another 200,000 b/d by the spring.

   This is a worry for both Mexico and the world. Although Mexico
   contains less than 1% of the world's proven oil reserves, it is the
   sixth-largest producer. Its output of 3.1m b/d is well above that of
   Venezuela or Kuwait. And although oil no longer dominates the Mexican
   economy--even at recent high prices it provided 16% of exports in
   2006, down from 68% in 1982--it lubricates the public finances,
   contributing nearly 40% of federal revenues.

   Since its nationalisation in 1938, Mexican oil has been the preserve
   of Petróleos Mexicanos, a state monopoly. Pemex resembles a poorly run
   government ministry. Its past three chief executives have all been
   accused of corruption (though some of these allegations may stem from
   bureaucratic infighting). It must comply with onerous procurement
   rules meant to prevent graft, which in practice are merely a drag on
   getting things done.

   This flawed behemoth is now in "a race against time" to compensate for
   Cantarell, says Fabio Barbosa, an energy specialist at Mexico's
   National Autonomous University. It is a race that Pemex seems likely
   to lose. In a document released in December setting out its strategy
   for the next five years, the energy ministry forecast that total oil
   production would decline to 2.5m b/d unless policies were reformed,
   and would remain roughly constant even if the industry were
   liberalised.

   This is partly the result of two wasted decades in which governments
   have milked Pemex of cash which it might otherwise have invested. That
   has begun to change: investment in exploration and production doubled
   between 2000 and 2006 (though much of the increase came through
   federal debt guarantees to private contractors). Mexico's president,
   Felipe Calderón, has pushed through a reform of public finances that
   will cut the royalty Pemex pays from 79 centavos on every peso of oil
   it extracts to 71.5 centavos by 2012. The company expects its capital
   spending to rise in 2008 by 20% in real terms.

   But this may be too little too late. Mr Barbosa reckons that the
   density of drilling rigs is 20 times greater in oil-producing parts of
   the American segment of the Gulf of Mexico than it is in Mexican
   waters. In particular, Pemex has drilled a mere 20 exploratory wells
   in water deeper than 300 metres (980 feet). The only result so far is
   Lakach, a gasfield now moving prematurely towards production after the
   sinking of only one exploratory well. The rush stems from an official
   desire to start deep-water production before the end of Mr Calderón's
   term in 2012, reckons David Shields, an energy consultant.

   Pemex has trouble maintaining its existing installations. A fire at a
   platform in Cantarell in October killed 21 workers. The firm has also
   suffered several bombings of pipelines this year by a guerrilla group.
   Since Mexico has not built a new refinery in 20 years, it has to
   import 40% of its petrol from the United States. The competition
   commission says Pemex's 7,500 petrol stations are too few to meet
   demand.

   The obvious solution is to privatise the industry, but that is
   politically impossible. The state oil monopoly is both popular and
   constitutionally mandated. So Mr Calderón and other politicians have
   been searching for ways to loosen the monopoly while respecting the
   constitution.

   The Senate's energy committee is holding a "private, technical debate"
   on how to do this, according to Rubén Camarillo, a senator from Mr
   Calderón's centre-right National Action Party. The purpose is to try
   to reach an all-party consensus by February. So far there is
   "agreement about what needs to be done, but not how to do it," says Mr
   Camarillo.

   One step forward would be to grant Pemex control of its own budget. At
   present some $10 billion a year of this goes back to the federal
   treasury--on top of Pemex's tax payments. Another proposal would open
   refining, transport and distribution to private enterprise. This could
   be done without changing the constitution, since what constitutes "the
   oil industry" is defined only in ordinary legislation, as César
   Hernández of CIDAC, a Mexico City think-tank, points out. This was the
   route taken in the 1990s to allow private investment in electricity
   generation and the transport of natural gas. Similarly, the ban on
   risk-sharing contracts in oil exploration is set out only in ordinary
   law.

   But the crux of the problem is how to make Pemex more efficient and
   open. Five of its 11 board members are appointed by the oil workers'
   union, a bastion of old-fashioned corporatism. Mr Camarillo reckons
   that reform could cut Pemex's operating costs by 20%. Others look at
   the company's overmanning and contract-padding and put the figure
   higher.

   Reaching a political consensus on oil reform eluded Mexico's past two
   presidents. Sergio Osorio, who advises the centre-left Party of the
   Democratic Revolution on energy, cautions that if Mr Calderón tries to
   pass reforms on an issue as sensitive as oil merely by reaching
   agreement with the centrist Institutional Revolutionary Party (as he
   did with reforms of pensions and taxes in 2007), he will "put at risk
   his legitimacy". Certainly there would be protests. But weighed
   against declining oil revenues, that is something Mr Calderón may be
   inclined to risk.

