
   Raúl Castro sets out his stall while Fidel hovers in the background


   A YEAR ago this week, Fidel Castro announced that he required
   intestinal surgery and that he had temporarily turned over his powers
   as Cuba's head of state and government to his slightly younger
   brother, Raúl. One year on, by all accounts, Fidel Castro continues to
   recover from complications that almost killed him. But it is slowly
   dawning on Cubans that change and the post-Fidel era have begun.

   To most outward appearances, everything in the communist island
   remains the same. Most of the observable differences are cosmetic.
   There are fewer government-organised mass rallies. Television
   schedules are no longer re-arranged around Fidel's lengthy musings and
   eccentric schedule. Raúl likes to keep normal office hours.

   The clearest sign so far that deeper change is afoot came on July
   26th, the official anniversary of the start of the revolution. Fidel
   would use the occasion to expatiate on the statistics of Cuban
   economic triumphs, or to excoriate the enemy across the water in the
   United States. By contrast, Raúl Castro's hour-long speech to a crowd
   of 100,000 in Camaguey contained some unusually sharp criticism of
   Cuba's own shortcomings.

   The standard wage of around $15 a month was "clearly insufficient to
   satisfy all needs," he said, stating the previously unutterable
   obvious. This was the main cause of "social indiscipline" (ie, the
   black market, which Fidel has tended to blame on personal greed).
   "Structural and conceptual changes will have to be introduced" to
   raise productivity, Raúl went on. By way of example, he singled out as
   "absurd" the centralised system for producing milk. He also called for
   more foreign investment, and invited America's next president to "talk
   in a civilised manner" to Cuba.

   "Raúl is raising new expectations," says Oscar Espinosa Chepe, a
   dissident economist. Can he satisfy them? As long as Fidel lives,
   reformers within the leadership will have to be cautious. Hardliners
   will put up less resistance against economic reform than against any
   loosening of one-party control. Still, there is no longer much talk of
   the elder Mr Castro returning to power.

   Apart from seeing the occasional visitor, Fidel's only public activity
   is publishing articles in the official newspaper, Granma. After four
   articles about the doings of Cuba's athletes at the Pan-American
   Games, his column this week returned to politics. It gave warning that
   "no one should entertain the slightest illusion" that the United
   States will negotiate with Cuba and noted that he is consulted on
   "every important decision". Maybe, but it now looks as if Raúl, not
   Fidel, is the man who makes them.

