
                                                                  Reuters

                                  Reuters

   Lower oil prices threaten Hugo Chávez's expensive revolution. But he
   is not about to run out of cash soon 


   HE LOOKS unstoppable. Since his sweeping victory in an election in
   December, Venezuela's leftist president, Hugo Chávez, has stepped on
   the revolutionary accelerator. Parliament this week gave him the power
   to legislate by decree for 18 months. A committee of his supporters is
   drafting a constitutional reform to turn Venezuela into an avowedly
   socialist country, and to allow the president to stand for re-election
   indefinitely. "Nothing can stop the revolution!" proclaim full-page
   advertisements in the newspapers, adorned with the newly-minted red
   star of Mr Chávez's "Bolivarian socialism". Nothing, that is, except
   perhaps a decline in the price of oil, on which the government depends
   for nearly half its revenue.

   It has been Mr Chávez's extraordinary good fortune that the price of
   oil increased more than sixfold since he took office in 1999 to its
   peak last year. That has allowed him to ramp up public spending. With
   private investors scared off by controls and Mr Chávez's socialist
   talk, it is this spending binge that helped the economy recover after
   an opposition-led two-month general strike in 2002-03 and has since
   fuelled rapid economic growth (see chart).

   So a lower oil price threatens economic growth, and with it Mr
   Chávez's popularity. Already, official projections and independent
   forecasts suggest the rate of growth may halve this year (but to a
   still-healthy 5%). Venezuelan crude, much of which is heavy and
   sulphurous, sells for about $10 less than lighter benchmark crudes
   such as Brent and West Texas Intermediate. Last year the average price
   for the Venezuelan "basket" of crudes was $56 a barrel. Last month,
   that figure was about $46. Any further fall might start to constrain
   Mr Chávez's ability to spend freely at home and abroad.

   The 2007 budget is conservatively based on an average price for the
   Venezuelan basket of $29. But it is also based on average oil
   production of around 3.4m barrels a day (b/d). Neither of these
   figures bears much relation to reality and nor does the budget itself.
   Independent analysts, including OPEC and the International Energy
   Agency, believe the true production figure to be around 2.5m b/d. To
   complicate matters further, some of the oil is sold at a discount as
   part of Mr Chávez's strategy to win influence abroad, and 100,000 b/d
   is more or less donated to Cuba.

   In contrast, total government spending last year was a third higher
   than originally budgeted. That pattern is likely to be repeated this
   year. "Quasi-fiscal" or off-budget spending, involving the diversion
   of oil revenues and the central bank's reserves into funds directly
   controlled by the president, is large and increasing.

   Mr Chávez has a large piggy-bank he can draw on. The forthcoming
   constitutional reform is likely to strip the central bank of its last
   vestiges of autonomy. Between them, the bank's reserves and the
   resources of the National Development Fund total around $50 billion--a
   similar amount to this year's official budget.

   So even if oil prices remain below their 2006 levels, nobody expects
   the bottom to fall out of the economy this year. But Mr Chávez needs
   not just to maintain public spending but to increase it if he is to
   satisfy the popular expectations he has whipped up at home, and to
   fulfil the pledges of aid he has made to friends abroad. In the past
   few weeks alone, he has promised to build 200,000 houses in Nicaragua
   and loan $1 billion to Ecuador, for example.

   The economy is showing some signs of strain. The inflation rate, at
   17% last year, was the highest in Latin America--even though
   Venezuela's currency is overvalued. Despite the oil bonanza, the
   government has run a fiscal deficit in most of Mr Chávez's time in
   power: this year that deficit may reach 3% of GDP.

   The president seems to be aware of the problems. He has urged OPEC to
   cut oil output further, to set a floor for benchmark prices of $50. On
   January 21st he announced his intention to increase petrol prices for
   the first time since he came to power. Petrol costs less than 5 cents
   a litre in Venezuela at the official exchange rate, but raising the
   price is politically sensitive. The government also plans tax
   increases. Officials insist that plans to nationalise the
   telecommunications and electricity industries, announced last month,
   will not trigger a fall in tax revenues, though opponents doubt that.

   The oil price has crept back up over the past fortnight after a sharp
   fall. It may well rise further. Even if it does not, few expect the
   benchmark price to fall to its levels of 2003, let alone 1999. But if
   prices stay at their levels of the past month, some economists believe
   that Venezuela's economy will struggle. "There's a sustainability
   problem," says Luis Zambrano, an economist at the Catholic University
   in Caracas. "More and more spending is needed to produce a
   [percentage] point of economic growth." What will lubricate the
   revolution when the oil bonanza ends?

