
   Disposing of rubbish, and wrecking livelihoods

   TARA BAI, a ragpicker in Mumbai who was named after an Indian queen,
   shakes her head angrily when asked if she is disgusted by her job:
   picking through mounds of rotting refuse for sellable plastic and
   metal. "It's not like that; it's how I survive," says the farmer's
   daughter, who moved to the city in 1972, when drought ended her rural
   life. But opening a fresh sack of rubbish to reveal millions of
   squirming maggots, she turns away as if to stop herself gagging.

   No one knows how many ragpickers there are in India. In Delhi alone,
   there are more than 300,000. They earn 100-150 rupees ($2.50-3.75) for
   eight hours' work. They save the Municipal Corporation of Delhi (MCD)
   an estimated 600,000 rupees in daily waste-disposal costs, reckons
   Chintan, a charity that campaigns for their welfare.

   A small improvement came last month when Delhi's government equipped
   400 ragpickers with protective gloves and clothing. It is also giving
   them health-and-safety training and, if the scheme is successful, will
   repeat the exercise with another 4,000 scavengers. "It is to help them
   in their upliftment", says Dr Sabata, an official at Delhi's
   environment ministry. Almost all ragpickers are dalits, once known as
   untouchables.

   Ragpickers suffer from dreadfully high levels of illness, especially
   respiratory diseases. But health is not, at present, the main concern
   of the groups that campaign for them. In recent months, ragpickers in
   Delhi have been denied access to much of the rubbish upon which they
   depend. In its drive to spruce up the capital for the 2010
   Commonwealth games, the MCD has awarded waste-collection contracts to
   private companies in six of its 12 zones. These firms dump rubbish in
   inaccessible containers without any thought for recycling. This is
   unsurprising. They earn six rupees per tonne of collected rubbish;
   sold on, that refuse would fetch just over five rupees. Chintan has
   researched the impact in two zones, and has found that half the
   ragpickers reported a substantial drop in earnings.

   In Mumbai, waste collection has not yet been privatised, but it might
   be soon. "The government wants Mumbai to be modern, clean," says Jyoti
   Mhapsekar, president of Stree Mukti Sanghatana, a charity that works
   with the city's poorest. "But it will take away the livelihoods of
   these people." It will also, she adds, strip urban India of one of its
   few green credentials. Ragpickers, who leave no rubbish that is
   reusable, are the original recyclers; without them an impressive
   industry will be lost.

