
   Stateless and homeless, Myanmar's Muslims have been abandoned by
   everyone


   AS UNREST in Myanmar kindled flickering hopes of political change,
   long-suffering refugees in Bangladesh were glued to their radios. They
   hope for a chance to reclaim their land and their dignity. Sadly, they
   may be waiting in vain. Not only are there scant signs of change from
   the repressive ruling junta. But these are also Rohingyas, members of
   a poor Muslim minority never very welcome at home.

   The junta's persecution of Muslims has been extreme. But anti-Muslim
   sentiments have been simmering for centuries in Burma. The
   dark-skinned Rohingyas, who have more in common physically and
   culturally with Bangladeshis than with most Burmese, have always
   suffered abuse.

   The junta has ostracised them, by refusing full Myanmar citizenship,
   calling them only "residents of Rakhine state". Almost all the roughly
   800,000 Rohingyas today are stateless. The military regime routinely
   presses them into slave labour, severely restricts their rights to
   travel and marry, and denies them access to both medical care and
   education.

   In Sittwe, the capital of Rakhine (formerly Arakan), Rohingyas lead
   desperately poor lives. Those not pressganged into road construction
   at meagre wages live by subsistence farming and fishing. "It's because
   we're Muslim," declares a trishaw driver. He says people give work to
   Buddhists. There are many poor Buddhists in Sittwe too. But the
   perception of unfair treatment lingers amongst Muslims, though some
   made common cause with September's anti-government protesters.

   Rohingyas have been fleeing Myanmar for decades. Many mingle among the
   million or so illegal Burmese migrants living in Thailand. And the
   office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR)
   has documented 12,000 in Malaysia, but admits there may be twice that
   number. The largest number has fled to Bangladesh. But the
   Bangladeshis have been reluctant hosts. Citing overpopulation and land
   scarcity, successive governments have forcibly repatriated the
   refugees: 250,000 were expelled between 1991 and 1992, and almost as
   many since.

   Since 1992 Bangladesh has refused to grant the Rohingyas refugee
   status. Only two official UNHCR camps now remain near Chittagong. But
   most of those repatriated to the same dire conditions they had fled
   have trickled back to squat in makeshift shelters and camps just
   across the border. Today around 8,000 live in an unofficial camp
   called Tal. Another 200,000 have settled in the surrounding area.

   Tal was born out of Operation Clean Heart, a 2002 crackdown in which
   thousands of Rohingyas were rooted out of local villages. Frido
   Herinckx of Médecins Sans Frontières, an aid organisation, describes
   how the police threatened local Bangladeshis with prison unless they
   reported on their Burmese neighbours. Instead of returning to Myanmar,
   thousands of homeless Rohingyas regrouped and settled on a
   30-metre-wide stretch of mud along the banks of the Naf River.

   In Tal as many as 12 people are crammed into flimsy shelters patched
   together from reeds and plastic sheets. Floods regularly inundate the
   camp, and local hostility to the incomers often leads to violence.
   Still, most feel that life there is preferable to the daily
   humiliations suffered in Myanmar. "If I can't even say `this house is
   mine,' how can I live there?" asks one 32-year-old man. He says the
   regime confiscated all he had.

   The government in Bangladesh has recently shown signs of softening its
   policies. It plans to move Tal to a drier and more permanent location.
   Aid workers hope the Rohingyas will eventually be granted Bangladeshi
   citizenship. Most Rohingyas say that if democracy is established in
   Myanmar, they will go back. But the junta is not their only enemy.

