
   Everybody claims a breakthrough with North Korea. This sounds familiar


   BRINGING his own food, and accompanied by 300 business, political and
   cultural figures--but excluding the international press--President Roh
   Moo-hyun of South Korea drove to Pyongyang on October 2nd to call upon
   North Korea's Kim Jong Il. At the heavily-armed border, which Bill
   Clinton once described as "the world's scariest place", Mr Roh got out
   of his limousine to cross on foot--a step, he wanted everyone to know,
   that symbolised a desire for peace and reconciliation between the two
   estranged sides of a bloody civil war that remains unresolved more
   than 50 years after it ground to a halt.

                                                                      EPA
                                                                      EPA

                                             The end of the line for Kim?

   It was only the second-ever meeting between leaders of the two
   countries, and Mr Roh's gambit was aimed at the history books. He
   wanted to salvage an ineffectual presidency, which ends in December,
   by asking Mr Kim to reduce tensions on the peninsula in return for
   economy-transforming aid and investment. Mr Roh's approach has led to
   divisions even among his own advisers. Some, such as the unification
   minister, Lee Jae-joung--described by one Western diplomat as an
   "unguided missile"--are gung-ho for reconciliation and are prepared to
   overlook a lot of Mr Kim's unpleasantness.

   Others despise the repressive regime of Mr Kim, and know that behind
   him lies a trail of broken promises. To offer too much now might also
   undermine the multilateral "six-party" process taking place in
   parallel, in which North Korea is being offered measured aid in return
   for clear steps towards dismantling its nuclear capabilities.

   Though this summit drew the opaque Mr Kim out from the shadows
   somewhat, he remains hard to read. During the first summit, in 2000,
   when he met Mr Roh's predecessor, Kim Dae-jung, Mr Kim was all
   bear-hugs and smiles. That meeting generated mass euphoria in North
   and South, but little of substance came of it--not even Mr Kim's
   promised return visit to Seoul. It later turned out that $500m had
   been paid to Mr Kim just for the audience.

   This week the befuddled looks of farmers as Mr Roh's presidential
   cavalcade swept up the highway to Pyongyang suggested that Mr Kim had
   not let all his compatriots in on the historic moment, one for which
   Mr Roh has begged for years. Though a handpicked crowd in the capital
   gave a joyous reception, waving artificial bunches of Kimjongilia, a
   strain of begonia that is a national flower, Mr Kim himself was stiff
   and tight-lipped. To many of his countrymen, he will have looked on
   television like an emperor receiving tribute. But many outsiders once
   again wondered about the health of the pallid, pot-bellied
   65-year-old. Mr Kim is known to have had heart problems, and some
   intelligence analysts recently have claimed to see the early signs of
   senile dementia--though this is mere conjecture.

   From what can be gleaned of their substance, talks between the two
   leaders on October 3rd only emphasised the distance still to travel.
   Mr Kim may be willing to squeeze the outside world for aid--but on his
   terms. So Mr Roh's offer of what amounted to a Marshall Plan to
   transform North Korea's economy in pursuit of Chinese-style
   liberalisation met with blank dismissal. Mr Kim does not even like a
   showcase industrial park at Kaesong, where South Korean manufacturers
   employ cheap North Korean labour, to be described as a model of
   successful "reform". Once again, Mr Kim showed how he puts his own
   survival over that of the North Koreans he brutalises.

   Yet a joint agreement was announced on October 4th, something Mr Roh
   will be able to take home with relief. Gone were his hopes for great
   involvement in the North, but there was agreement to allow freight
   trains into Kaesong. There was a recommitment to help families divided
   by the civil war to meet (though a word from Mr Kim is all it would
   take to solve that sad problem). Talks will be sought with America and
   China to put a formal end to the civil war (though peace on the
   peninsula, these countries are likely to argue, can only come after
   its denuclearisation). Steps were promised (as, fruitlessly, they were
   at the 2000 summit) to reduce military tensions: defence ministers
   would meet, while a disputed western maritime area would see its
   fisheries jointly mined.

   Promising as all this sounds, much of it merely repeats earlier
   promises. In the long run, Mr Kim has never really seen his interests
   as best served by closer relations with the South. They might lead,
   eventually, to reunification and hence to his dynasty's extinction.
   China, Japan, Russia and America, the other parties in the six-party
   talks, may loathe his regime, but they are in effect helping to prop
   it up.

   Peace dividend

   As Mr Roh struggled to secure his piece of paper in Pyongyang, the
   Chinese government this week declared a breakthrough in those talks as
   well. Almost a year after North Korea exploded a nuclear bomb, the
   Chinese said the country had agreed to disable its main nuclear
   reactor and reprocessing plant at Yongbyon by the year's end (this,
   the main source of the North's bomb-grade plutonium, has been shut
   since July). North Korea has also promised to give a full account of
   all its nuclear activities by then. If it sticks to this pledge--and
   American-led inspection teams are to oversee the disablement,
   starting, said negotiators, as early as this month--then the North
   will get about $100m in aid. Meanwhile, America says it will drop the
   North from its list of states that sponsor terrorism, a central North
   Korean demand.

   In Washington, DC, the administration hailed the pact, which had
   George Bush's personal nod, as a real step on the path to a
   nuclear-free Korean peninsula. Others remain sceptical until the fine
   print is known. And no one doubts that the next stage after
   declaration and disablement--getting North Korea to give up its
   handful of nuclear weapons along with its stock of fissile
   material--will prove by far the hardest. For now, Mr Kim is being
   given the benefit of the doubt. Not for the first time, he may turn a
   profit from that. Perhaps the brutalised country he has done so much
   to impoverish might even benefit too.

