
   A boom in panda production is good for both bears and business 

                                                             Imaginechina

                                Imaginechina

   LU LU paces up and down in a small concrete enclosure, showing no
   interest in a video he can see just outside his pen. He may have been
   excited by the panda pornography the first time he watched it, but he
   certainly isn't now. It probably doesn't help that the soundtrack is
   malfunctioning. Pandas like the noise and smell of sex much more than
   the images.

   Still, Lu Lu's keepers at the panda research centre at Wolong in
   Sichuan province, set among misty mountains covered in bamboo,
   rhododendrons and fir trees, believe that adult panda movies may have
   helped the conception of his daughter, Ying Ying, last year. One of a
   pair given by the Chinese leadership to celebrate the 10th anniversary
   of Hong Kong's handover from Britain to the communist mainland, she is
   now a star attraction at a theme park in the territory, and a symbol
   of new hope for China's panda population.

   China's record of protecting its rare species has been desultory. In
   the world's first extinction of a large vertebrate for half a century,
   the Yangzi river dolphin was recently declared to have been wiped out
   (notwithstanding a reported sighting in August 2007). The South China
   tiger is close to disappearing in the wild (official claims in October
   of the first wild sighting in more than 30 years have been widely
   derided in China as false).

   Pandas might have expected to get better treatment. With their winning
   combination of scarcity and cuddliness, they are a national symbol, a
   powerful instrument of foreign policy and a potent brand. Empress Wu
   of the Tang dynasty gave pandas to Japan in the 7th century. Mao
   Zedong's gift of Ling Ling and Hsing Hsing to President Richard Nixon
   in 1972 broke the ice between the two cold war rivals and gave birth
   to the term "panda diplomacy".

   Yet in the 1980s there were fears of imminent extinction, and much
   debate about why. At first many said the panda was an evolutionary
   dead end: it had bad genes and was hopeless at sex. If that was the
   case, protecting it was going to be tough. But increasingly scientists
   have put the blame on people, who exacerbated a problem caused by the
   life-cycle of the high altitude bamboo that is the panda's staple
   diet. In the 1980s, it burst into flower and died, as it does every 30
   to 80 years; but human activity had deprived the pandas of access to
   lower altitude species that would once have served as a back-up.

   Since then, China has begun to tackle the problems of both wild and
   captive populations. The captive panda breeding programme has
   undergone a remarkable transformation. Long-held beliefs about the
   animal's reproductive capacities have been shattered. No longer are
   desperate keepers feeding Viagra to underperforming males (that did
   not work anyway). Researchers have given up ideas of cloning them.
   Good old-fashioned sex is now doing the trick, accounting for some 80%
   of births at Wolong. That's thanks to better habitats (larger areas
   help), better nutrition (more fresh bamboo) and new techniques for
   assessing when the female is in heat (only three or four days a year).

   In 2006 Wolong had 17 cubs and Chengdu, capital of Sichuan and
   location of the other main panda-breeding centre, had 12--record crops
   for both institutions. As a result, a new problem has emerged:
   overcrowding. Wolong's new-born panda cubs lie in rows in bassinets,
   as in a maternity hospital. Last year some of the younger pandas fell
   sick, possibly because disease spreads easily between animals in close
   proximity. Wolong officials say all recovered. But the China Daily, a
   state-controlled newspaper, quoted an unnamed expert as saying that
   two died after a disease outbreak this year. Wolong is building new
   quarters farther away to scatter the captives more widely. It aims to
   keep births to around a dozen a year.

   Life for wild pandas has been improving too, partly by accident. In
   1998 floods along the Yangzi left thousands of people dead and
   millions homeless. Logging, which deprives river banks of
   water-absorbing tree cover, was blamed for exacerbating the disaster.
   The government banned tree-felling across a wide area, including much
   of the pandas' habitat.

   Counting wild panda numbers is a difficult and controversial science,
   relying on estimates based on examination of droppings. The third and
   latest government survey, conducted between 1999 and 2003, put the
   population at 1,596. This was up from 1,114 in 1988 but was still
   short of the 2,459 pandas counted a decade earlier.

   Given improvements in survey methods, experts warn against drawing
   firm conclusions from comparisons of the three sets of results. Many
   believe, however, that numbers in the wild are on the rise. Hu Jingchu
   of China West Normal University says there may be more than 2,000 now.
   Some researchers believe there may be considerably more. In 2006
   Chinese and British scientists led by Michael Bruford of Cardiff
   University and Wei Fuwen of the Chinese Academy of Sciences published
   research on droppings found at Wanglang reserve in Sichuan. They
   concluded that there were 66 pandas living in that area, more than
   twice as many as the 2003 census suggested, implying a total wild
   panda population of 2,500-3,000.

   Panda branding

   Flush with pandas, Wolong is now experimenting with ways of releasing
   them into the wild. A male was set free in 2006. It was injured,
   apparently by another panda, re-released, and later found dead.
   Experts believe it fell off a tree during a fight. Another panda is
   likely to be released in the coming year, this time a female (thought
   less likely to get into trouble). The hope is that pandas can be
   released into small isolated wild populations that are in danger of
   being weakened by in-breeding.

   In another eight to ten years, says Li Desheng of the Wolong reserve,
   China should have around 300 captive pandas of sufficient genetic
   diversity to ensure the indefinite survival of the species (there are
   now about 220). Efforts are now being made to identify the genetic
   make-up of the captives to ensure the best possible mating matches.
   Artificial insemination will still sometimes be necessary, but better
   and safer ways of doing this are being developed. The process normally
   involves the use of general anaesthetic, which is risky. Hong Kong's
   Ocean Park is working on a technique for training males to provide
   semen samples while wide awake.

   More pandas do not bring down the price for foreign zoos, though,
   because China controls the supply. Since the height of the bamboo
   crisis in 1984, China has ceased handing out pandas free as a gesture
   of friendship to other countries. Western zoos now have to pay $1m per
   pair annually (plus another $600,000 if a cub is born) to keep them on
   what is normally a 10-year loan. Favoured countries may get better
   deals. Thailand's Chiang Mai Zoo is an exception, having secured a
   pair in 2003 for $250,000 a year, to the chagrin of its Western
   counterparts.

   The money is still very useful. The number of panda reserves has
   increased to more than 60 from 13 in the early 1990s, with the area
   covered roughly tripling from 6,000 sq km in the same period. Hiring
   and training staff, replanting forest and bamboo and moving farmers
   away from panda habitats is costly. So too is breeding and looking
   after the captive population.

   Sichuan province is increasingly keen to cash in on its
   black-and-white gold dust and has plans to tighten its hold over the
   brand (two other provinces, Shaanxi and Gansu, also have wild pandas,
   but considerably fewer). In 2006 the Sichuan Panda Strategic Planning
   Office was established. The provincial legislature adopted a five year
   economic plan calling for a "panda brand strategy" aimed at boosting
   the revenues of Sichuan's leading companies. Draft measures are said
   to call for panda-branded goods and services to contribute 5% of
   Sichuan's GDP growth in 2010 and 15% by 2020. The idea is for these to
   use a common panda logo.

   Tourism will be the driving force. Having gained some respite thanks
   to better protection of reserves from loggers, farmers and hunters,
   pandas now face an onslaught from the country's fast-growing middle
   classes in search of new leisure destinations. To help tour buses, the
   winding narrow road up to Wolong is being widened and straightened
   (the boom of dynamite echoes up the gorge whose peaks are home to
   rarely seen wild pandas). Tourist numbers to Wolong are likely to rise
   from 60,000 to 180,000.

   The Wolong reserve has taken a 20% share in a local state-controlled
   tourism company; which raises questions of whether the pandas' and the
   tourism industry's interests are perfectly aligned. Experts disagree.
   Zhang Hemin, Wolong's director, argues that pandas are not as afraid
   of human beings as is generally believed. They have even been known,
   he says, to cross roads and wander into urban areas (though few of
   Wolong's panda experts have seen one in the wild). Others say human
   noises and smells scare pandas, even at a distance. The Sichuan
   government says it is promoting "eco-tourism", but Fan Zhiyong of WWF,
   a conservation group (and a big contributor to panda conservation in
   China), is sceptical. "I sometimes ask, what is eco-tourism? Nobody
   can give me good answers," he says.

