
   The opposition pulls itself together 

                                                                  Reuters

                                  Reuters

       Lee Myung-bak looks for encouragement from Park Geun-hye's Dad


   AS BEFITS a daughter of a former president and a presidential aspirant
   herself, Park Geun-hye has a house and garden in one of Seoul's most
   expensive districts. It is not hard to find. Residents and
   petrol-station attendants helpfully point the way. Yet her party's
   leader, Lee Myung-bak, who narrowly defeated her in a primary election
   to represent the Grand National Party in this December's presidential
   election, has not visited and until last week had not telephoned.

   Mr Lee's tin ear to Ms Park and her supporters opened up dissension in
   the ranks and paved the way for Lee Hoi-chang, a former party chairman
   and twice a losing presidential candidate, to declare his candidacy
   yet again--this time as an independent. Mr Lee vowed to end the
   "sunshine policy" of aid to North Korea, thereby--it was
   thought--appealing to Ms Park's more conservative supporters.

   This year's presidential election is beginning to look a bit like the
   previous one, in 2002, which also involved divisions in the Grand
   National Party, a third candidate (who withdrew at the last minute),
   Lee Hoi-chang's candidacy--and corruption charges. This time, Lee
   Hoi-chang's advisers say Lee Myung-bak is vulnerable to questions
   about his role in a fraudulent investment scheme from which he
   allegedly benefited while others lost out. Lee Myung-bak denies the
   allegations and says he will resign if he is found to have played a
   role in the fraud, known as BBK, the name of the failed investment
   company.

   The candidate of the liberal ruling party, Chung Dong-young, has
   failed to capitalise on the opposition's infighting. Mr Chung lags
   behind Lee Hoi-chang, who in turn trails far behind Lee Myung-bak,
   according to opinion polls.

   In 1997, the Grand National Party, then in power, blew a large lead by
   squabbling; it does not want that to happen again. The desire for
   unity has increased Ms Park's power to demand concessions in return
   for support. Lee Myung-bak capitulated this week, promising to
   co-operate with Ms Park on future policy decisions, and blaming
   himself for disunity. "I have been inconsiderate," the contrite former
   mayor of Seoul says. That was enough to win Ms Park's endorsement.

   Lee Hoi-chang's supporters are unperturbed, vowing to continue the
   fight until the December 19th election. "What will happen when the BBK
   founder returns to Korea to defend himself?" they ask.

   Lee Myung-bak's supporters are equally unperturbed. They point out
   that their candidate weathered weeks of withering criticism from Ms
   Park about BBK during the primary election and his support remains
   solid. With Ms Park now endorsing the front runner, they expect Lee
   Hoi-chang's support to ebb. If polls are any guide, the bulldozer--as
   Lee Myung-bak is known--is still on course for victory.

