
                                                                       AP

                                     AP

   Organised by text messages and internet chats, China's middle classes
   are daring to protest, and giving the government a fright


   INFORMATION technology in China is once again making political waves.
   In the tropical seaport of Xiamen citizens still talk excitedly about
   how an anonymous text message on their mobile phones last month
   prompted them to join one of the biggest middle-class protests of
   recent years. And in Beijing politicians are scrambling to calm an
   uproar fuelled by an online petition against slave labour in brick
   kilns.

   Chinese officials have had reason to worry before about the rallying
   power of the internet and mobile phones. Two years ago they helped
   activists organise protests against Japan in several Chinese cities.
   But the government, at least initially, sympathised with those
   protests. By contrast the demonstrations in Xiamen were directed at
   officialdom, and the slave-labour scandal embarrasses the government.
   It involves allegations that officials ignored kiln-owners' use of
   abducted boys to perform dangerous work. This has triggered a heated
   online debate about the political flaws that allowed such horrors to
   happen.

   The text message in Xiamen, circulated in late May, called for a rally
   outside the city government's headquarters on June 1st to protest
   against plans to build a huge chemical factory on a site, pictured
   above, in the suburbs. It compared building the $1.4 billion plant for
   making paraxylene, used in polyester, to dropping an "atomic bomb" on
   Xiamen. It warned readers that the factory could cause leukaemia and
   birth deformities among the city's 2.3m residents and their offspring
   (hence the choice of June 1st, children's day in China).

   The response was remarkable. Xiamen has a thriving economy and little
   history of protest. Yet many thousands of people rallied and marched,
   even though it was Friday, a working day, and as usual hot and humid.
   They came mostly from China's fast-growing middle class, a group the
   Communist Party usually regards as a dependable bulwark of support. In
   many Chinese cities there have been small-scale middle-class protests
   over issues related to property rights. But they are rarely directed
   at city governments.

   Even more remarkable is that the protest occurred in the face of clear
   government disapproval. Civil servants were warned they might be
   punished for taking part. Government offices even required their
   employees to keep working on the weekend of June 2nd and 3rd to
   prevent them taking to the streets. On May 30th the government
   appeared to make a big concession by announcing a suspension of the
   project pending a further environmental review. But the protest went
   ahead two days later anyway. At one point some people shouted slogans
   calling on the city's party chief, He Lifeng, to resign, but the
   demonstration was peaceful. Thousands marched again on June 2nd.

   The text message seemed to touch a raw nerve. Public confidence in the
   city leadership had been damaged by a proposal submitted to China's
   parliament in March by senior academics that the Taiwanese-owned
   paraxylene plant be moved further away from residential areas.
   Previously, say residents, the Xiamen government had given no
   indication that paraxylene might be hazardous. Criticism of the
   project began to flourish on local internet chat forums and blogs.
   Many complained that the plant would further ruin a once pleasant
   seaside city already threatened by smog and polluted seawater.

   The protests in Xiamen must be worrying to officials in Beijing. Urban
   environments have been deteriorating across the country. If tolerance
   for this among the middle classes were to crumble, unrest could
   spread. Ominously, from the party's perspective, hundreds of Beijing
   residents rallied outside the offices of the State Environmental
   Protection Administration (SEPA) on June 5th. Their complaint was
   about plans to build a waste incinerator in the north-west of the
   city, which they said could spread toxic chemicals. Two days later
   SEPA called for a further investigation of the incinerator project as
   well as of Xiamen's urban development plans.

   Chinese leaders have been similarly quick to respond to the torrent of
   online protest--and even some stiff criticism by the state-owned
   press--provoked by the reports of slave labour in the provinces of
   Shanxi in the north, and Henan, to its south. A petition posted on
   June 7th by fathers of abducted boys on [4]Tianya, a popular internet
   discussion forum, spread rapidly. Official newspapers soon picked up
   the story, describing the brutal conditions in which the labourers
   were held captive and the indifference of local police. Within eight
   days China's leading politicians were reported to have stepped in.
   Hundreds of "slaves" were declared to have been freed and many of
   their bosses arrested.

   In Xiamen, having made their last-minute concession, officials are now
   trying to track down behind-the-scenes organisers of the protests
   (some residents believe property developers, worried about the impact
   of the project on prices, encouraged people to take part). Notices
   have been put up in residential buildings calling on protesters to
   surrender themselves to police. But such tactics inspire far less fear
   than they did in the wake of the Tiananmen Square protests of 1989.
   Some residents say they now want a referendum on the project. A
   professor at Xiamen University says that if the project's opponents
   win, a new "environmental consciousness" will spread to other Chinese
   cities.

   For all their pro-green rhetoric, China's leaders would abhor this.
   They remain deeply wary of environmental groups, fearful that if given
   a free rein they could rapidly mobilise middle-class opinion against
   government policies. Nick Young of China Development Brief, a
   newsletter, says that these concerns increased in the wake of
   democratic revolutions early this decade in several former Soviet
   states. Although they eased a bit last year, Mr Young thinks the
   government will remain cautious. Xiamen has only one officially
   registered non-governmental environmental group. It has kept itself
   nervously aloof from the paraxylene-plant campaign. In Xiamen as
   elsewhere, it is China's online civil society that is leading the
   charge.

