
   The assassination of Benazir Bhutto seems to assure a turbulent
   election campaign and strengthen the likelihood of an unstable
   government 

                                                                      AFP

                                    AFP


   FOR some time Pakistan has been the main contender for the title of
   most dangerous country on earth. Since the murder of Benazir Bhutto on
   December 27th its claim has been strengthened. People are right to be
   worried. But is the forthcoming, postponed election doomed to be a
   violent shambles? And is the country itself doomed to disintegrate,
   fall into the hands of Islamists or lose control of its nuclear
   weapons to jihadists? Not necessarily. In the short run, at least,
   much turns on the rival interpretations of how Miss Bhutto died that
   day in Rawalpindi.

   It went like this. A clean-shaven young man, wearing a white shirt,
   black waistcoat and sun-glasses, presses through the adoring scrimmage
   around Miss Bhutto. Almost within arm's reach of the sports utility
   vehicle from which the twice and would-be future prime minister waves
   to the crowd, as she campaigns for an election due to take place on
   January 8th, he pauses. Behind him is a taller figure, apparently
   bearded, his face shrouded in a white head-dress. Then the
   clean-shaven man points a pistol at Miss Bhutto, and three sharp
   cracks ring out.

   Viewed in slow motion, on a film broadcast by Britain's Channel 4
   three days after the event, Miss Bhutto's trademark white headscarf is
   flipped up, as if by a sudden gust. An instant later two men standing
   on the back of the vehicle duck their heads and Miss Bhutto slumps.
   Swirling chaos ensues, as a suicide-killer, believed to be the
   shrouded youth, pulls the pin from his bomb.

   If genuine, the film seems to corroborate the first official
   description of Miss Bhutto's murder: that she was shot in the head
   just before a suicide-bomber dispatched himself, her killer and about
   20 others. The leaders of Miss Bhutto's Pakistan People's Party (PPP),
   the country's biggest, concur. The party's spokeswoman, Sherry Rehman,
   who was with Miss Bhutto when she died and then bathed her corpse,
   says she saw entry and exit wounds in the head. But the government has
   since changed its version of the killing. It now asserts that Miss
   Bhutto, whose body was buried without an autopsy, was not shot at all;
   she died, according to the new version, as a result of hitting her
   head on the lever of the car's sun-roof while trying to escape the
   blast.

   Baffling, almost irrelevant, as this dispute may seem, it added fuel
   to four days of violent rioting by PPP supporters, mostly in the
   southern province of Sindh, home of the Bhuttos. Indeed many
   Pakistanis, who are deeply mistrustful of the government of President
   Pervez Musharraf, their recently demobbed ruler, consider this
   revision suspicious. It suggests to them that the government is
   somehow blaming Miss Bhutto for her own assassination--or even
   ridiculing her.

   Whatever the truth, the conviction is widespread in Pakistan that the
   government had a hand in killing her. After all, she had accused a
   cabal of army spies and Mr Musharraf's political henchmen of plotting
   to kill her. And that was before a previous attempt on her life, in
   October, in which two suicide blasts killed more than 140 PPP
   supporters during a home-coming rally for her in Karachi. Her return
   that day marked the end of an eight-year self-imposed exile and the
   start of her campaign to serve a third term as prime minister.

   Within hours of Miss Bhutto's death, Sindhis began to rampage. Angry
   mobs tore through every town in the province, burning cars, looting
   shops, screaming in grief for the unrivalled leader of Pakistan's main
   political dynasty. From within high-gated compounds rang the shrill of
   women's screams. In other provinces the response was less histrionic.
   By the time this first frenzy was over, 174 banks, 22 trains and 13
   electoral offices had been looted or set alight. Over 50 people had
   been killed. The government puts the damage at $200m. Other responses
   were more measured, but also discouraging. On December 31st the main
   Karachi stockmarket, a high-performing symbol of the strong economic
   growth of Mr Musharraf's era, opened nearly 4.5% down. The rupee also
   dived, as capital inflows, on which much of the growth has been based,
   dried up like a desert stream.

   For now, the violence has faded, even if the pessimism has yet to
   lift. On January 2nd it was announced that the election would be
   postponed to February 18th, immediately after the month-long Shia
   festival of Muharram, a time associated with mourning. This followed
   much haggling among the political parties. They had started to
   recalculate their electoral prospects even before Miss Bhutto's corpse
   had been interred on December 28th--at a vast Moghul-style mausoleum
   that she had had built for her father, Zulfikar Ali Bhutto, another
   former prime minister, executed for supposedly sanctioning the death
   of an opponent. In a country where no party can win an outright
   majority, and the army alternately rigs the elections and seizes
   power, political planning is a perilous enterprise.

   Musharraf opts for Fabian tactics

   In the final months of 2007, however, a fairly solid consensus had
   emerged about the outcome of the election. True, Mr Musharraf's
   blundering efforts to retain the autocratic powers he had seized
   nearly a decade ago had brought political turmoil to Pakistan. But
   rough polling, and an assessment of Mr Musharraf's best interests,
   suggested that the PPP and the former ruling party, the Pakistan
   Muslim League (Q), which is loyal to the old soldier, would emerge as
   the two biggest parties, neither of them with a majority. They might
   then have formed a coalition government, which Miss Bhutto plainly
   hoped to lead.

   That result, minus Miss Bhutto, is now the very best that Mr Musharraf
   can hope for. More likely, say some pundits, is that Pakistanis will
   vote in huge numbers for the PPP, in sympathy for its loss. That might
   give the PPP an outright majority, which is no doubt why Mr
   Musharraf's loyalists were so eager to have the election postponed,
   though their demand was ostensibly to allow time to repair polling
   stations and replenish ballot papers. A sympathy vote could boost
   Pakistan's second party, led by Nawaz Sharif. The main rival in much
   of Punjab, Pakistan's biggest province, to Mr Musharraf's loyalists,
   Mr Sharif demanded that the vote be held on time. But the Election
   Commission, supposedly independent but in fact controlled by Mr
   Musharraf, ruled that this was impossible.

   The PPP's new acting leader, Asif Zardari, who is Miss Bhutto's
   widower, will act as regent while his co-leader, the couple's
   19-year-old son Bilawal, completes his studies at Oxford University.
   Mr Zardari had also wanted the vote to be held as planned. In agreeing
   to a delay, he is likely to have won some quid pro quo for the PPP.
   Yet Mr Zardari has meanwhile accused the former ruling party of
   killing his wife, and thereby made clear that the PPP is not to be
   trifled with. With a reputation for corruption and thuggery, earned
   during Miss Bhutto's two terms in power, he has reminded his main
   rivals that the PPP currently controls the streets.

   It is a point worth making. A long delay, the PPP reasonably feared,
   would increase Mr Musharraf's agents' ability to manipulate the
   election in his favour. They have, after all, rigged all the four
   previous polls presided over by their master, who has also staged two
   coups. On December 31st PPP officials announced that Miss Bhutto had
   been due to hand a 200-page dossier on Mr Musharraf's latest
   vote-rigging schemes to some American congressmen.

   Meanwhile, the dispute continues over who killed Miss Bhutto. The
   government says it was al-Qaeda. At least, that is the label it has
   attached to the alleged culprit, a Taliban warlord called Baitullah
   Mehsud, who holds sway over a terrorist haven along the north-western
   frontier with Afghanistan. Mr Zardari, like most Pakistanis, scoffs at
   this. "I think soon the chickens are going to lay their eggs and we
   will blame them on al-Qaeda," he says. "Al-Qaeda has nothing to fear.
   Why would they fear us? Are they our political opponents?"

   Mr Mehsud has denied having anything to do with the killing--in fact,
   he has called for an international investigation into the atrocity,
   though he may have to be satisfied with the announcement that a team
   of British detectives will assist with an investigation into Miss
   Bhutto's death. He is certainly capable of the crime. Last month it
   was reported that he had been elected leader of Tehrik-e-Taliban
   Pakistan, a new association of tribally based Islamist militias in the
   frontier area. Flush with Afghan drug money, and a dream of global
   jihad, these groups have gained unprecedented power during America's
   six-year war on terror. At America's expense, estimated at around $5
   billion, 100,000 Pakistani troops have been sent to quell them. Yet
   they now control a vast and spreading swathe of territory. Mr Mehsud's
   fief, in particular, is reported to have become a hub for Pakistani
   and foreign jihadist terrorists. Intelligence agents say they include
   members of Jaish-e-Muhammad, a Pakistani outfit formerly trained by
   the army to fight in Indian-held Kashmir. This group is alleged to
   have supplied dozens of suicide-bombers for attacks in Pakistan in
   recent months.

   One more unexplained murder

   Miss Bhutto may have been killed by the same men. A Western-educated
   woman, who applauded America's war on terror, she was presumably not
   to their taste. And indeed, shortly before she returned to Pakistan,
   Mr Mehsud was alleged to be plotting to kill her. Similarly, within
   hours of Miss Bhutto's assassination, the government released what it
   claimed was a recording of Mr Mehsud discussing the atrocity over the
   telephone. It features a voice, allegedly Mr Mehsud's, asking who had
   killed Miss Bhutto, then rejoicing to learn that the killers were his
   own men. To some disinterested listeners, however, this sounded
   phoney. Surely Mr Mehsud would have kept closer control over such an
   audacious and meticulous ambush? Moreover, on the tape he is heard
   giving what appears to be a precise description of his position. Why,
   then, had the army apparently not tried to kill him?

   For that matter, it is not entirely obvious that Mr Mehsud would have
   wanted Miss Bhutto dead. There are richer jihadist prizes in
   Pakistan--not least Mr Musharraf, whose removal Ayman al-Zawahiri,
   Osama bin Laden's deputy, has called for. Mr al-Zawahiri had not
   bothered to denounce Miss Bhutto, a discredited female opposition
   politician. Yet the campaign to dispatch Miss Bhutto was carried out
   with an unusual thoroughness and persistence. On the eve of an
   election that her party had a fair hope of winning, it is not hard to
   imagine that Miss Bhutto's assassination was politically motivated.

   Despite the investigation that Mr Musharraf has promised, the truth
   may never out. Pakistan's political history is crammed with
   unexplained killings. They include the violent deaths of Miss Bhutto's
   two brothers, Murtaza and Shah Nawaz, whose bodies also lie in the
   family's meringue-like mausoleum in Garhi Khuda Bakhsh. (Mr Zardari
   was charged with ordering the death of Murtaza in a storm of police
   gunfire in 1996. He was later exonerated.) Another mystery surrounds
   the death of General Zia ul Haq, the dictator who toppled, then
   hanged, Miss Bhutto's father. One day in 1988 the general's plane,
   which was also carrying America's ambassador to Pakistan, fell to
   earth.

   Bring on the doomsayers

   On December 28th thousands of sombre men, black scarves bound around
   their arms, converged on Garhi Khuda Bakhsh. Many had served the lofty
   Bhuttos. Passing the charred carcass of a train and several gutted
   government buildings, they streamed in to see Miss Bhutto buried,
   shouting "Hang Musharraf!" as they came. "This is civil war. It is
   worse than Iraq," said one mourner, Zulfikar Ali Mirza, a black-clad
   PPP stalwart with an assault rifle wedged beside the seat of his car.
   "I see no more map of Pakistan. She was the only link between the four
   provinces. Now there is no future for Pakistan."

   It is Pakistan's particular misfortune that its progress tends to be
   measured against exaggerated doomsday prophecies such as this. Three
   are most popular. The first, which is as old as Pakistan itself,
   decrees that the place will fragment (history is not encouraging: born
   of partition in 1947, the country lost its eastern component in 1971).
   The other two are more recent. One is that Pakistan, like neighbouring
   Iran, will fall to Islamists--perhaps even of Mr Mehsud's vicious
   kind. A related fear is that terrorists will get hold of the country's
   nuclear arsenal. All three nightmares are very unlikely in the short
   term, but may be increasingly possible.

   To be clear, Pakistan is bitterly divided. Punjab dominates the
   economy and the army. In other parts of the country military
   rule--which Pakistanis have known for over half their history--is
   considered Punjabi rule. Every decade or so, in Sindh, Baluchistan and
   North-West Frontier Province (NWFP), Punjabi troops are dispatched to
   quash an insurgency. The army is currently attempting this task in
   both Baluchistan and NWFP, on several fronts. NWFP has always been so
   rebellious that no Pakistani government has dared to call it by its
   logical name, Pushtunistan, for fear of rallying the Pushtun tribesmen
   who live there. But the army is still quite strong enough to prevent
   any chunk of Pakistan from splitting off.

   The other prophecies are more sobering--given the current security
   crisis on the Afghan frontier, and a history of institutional Islamism
   within the army itself. The American-backed campaign in north-western
   Pakistan has gone badly. It has almost certainly spawned much more
   radicalism and terror than it has ended. Baker Atyani, head of the
   al-Arabiya television office in Islamabad, says he receives two or
   three videotapes every week from local and foreign jihadist groups
   along the frontier--many more than he can broadcast. Clearly, Pakistan
   has a long-term problem with militancy. And the prevalence of jihadist
   sympathies within the army also remains a concern. For whatever
   reason, many soldiers on the frontier are demoralised: at least
   several hundred have surrendered to untrained bandits. Nonetheless,
   despite these concerns, a strong majority of Pakistanis remain
   moderate.

   It is right to worry about these, perfectly imaginable, calamities.
   And yet, again and again, governments at home and abroad, civilian and
   military, have let such nightmares distract them from dealing with
   Pakistan's pressing political problems. Force, the army's preferred
   solution, is invariably insufficient to provide solutions. For
   example, so long as marginalised Baluchis, whose vast western province
   is Pakistan's richest in minerals but poorest per person, do not
   receive a fair share of state spending, they will periodically rise
   up. Instead of slapping them down--as Mr Bhutto did in the 1970s, and
   Mr Musharraf does now--the government will one day have to give them a
   fair deal.

   Even in easier times, improving Pakistan's government would be a huge
   undertaking. To get Pakistanis to place the slightest trust in their
   state may take decades. And even the most sensible policies may fall
   short in the end. Pakistan is in a dangerous and unstable
   neighbourhood. It has also been miserably served by its politicians,
   and today the choice before the voters looks as bad as ever before.

                                                                      AFP

                                    AFP

                           Cast votes, not stones

   Yet it is at least abundantly clear that Pakistan's rotten politics
   and vagabond institutions will never be put right by an army dictator,
   including an unreformed Mr Musharraf. On seizing power in 1999, he
   promised to reduce corruption, fight extremism, strengthen civil
   institutions and do a host of other good things. In one or two
   respects, he has scored impressive hits: on his watch, for example,
   Pakistan has enjoyed steady economic policies and some useful reforms.
   But, like all dictators, Mr Musharraf has increasingly subordinated
   his good intentions to his wish to cling to power, with disastrous
   results.

   After his second coup, last November, Mr Musharraf abolished the press
   freedoms of which he had long boasted. He also sacked 60 potentially
   disobedient judges, and appointed many biddable idiots in their
   places. The damage thus done to Pakistan's judiciary, which was rotten
   to begin with, will take years to undo. He has also quietly dropped
   the architect of Pakistan's impressive economic performance, his
   former prime minister, Shaukat Aziz.

   No more generals, please

   Given this record, it is hard to imagine what beneficial role Mr
   Musharraf might yet play, whether he is in uniform or not. He speaks
   of his desire for a "democratic transition". The first test of his
   sincerity will be whether Pakistanis are allowed a fair election next
   month. Then all eyes will be on the kind of government that emerges.
   In a country in a state of shock, predictions are perhaps unwise. Yet
   it seems as likely as not that the PPP and its pro-Musharraf rivals
   will, after all, form a government together, though it is unclear who
   might lead it.

   Disappointing though she was, tainted by corruption and only dubiously
   democratic (she was "life chairperson" of her party), Miss Bhutto was
   her country's only national leader. Pakistan may not have realised how
   much it would miss her, until now she is gone.

