
                                                                    Panos

                                   Panos

   The slum-dwellers of Dharavi are green

   LIKE Hindu souls, disposable plastic cups are many times reborn in
   Dharavi. In a spiralling continuum, they are discarded and gathered
   in, melted down to their polypropylene essence, and re-moulded in some
   new plastic form. Recycling is one of the slum's biggest industries.
   Thousands of tonnes of scrap plastic, metals, paper, cotton, soap and
   glass revolve through Dharavi each day.

   Location is the key to this. Until two decades ago, the slum was next
   door to Bombay's biggest rubbish tip. This provided a livelihood for
   thousands of local dalits, for whom "ragpicking"--scavenging on
   society's leftovers for anything of salvageable value--is a
   traditional employment. The tip has since been shifted outside the
   city. So too, for want of space, have many of Dharavi's recycling
   units. Yet the roughly 6,000 tonnes of rubbish produced each day by a
   swelling Mumbai continues to sustain an estimated 30,000 ragpickers,
   including many residents of Dharavi. The slum is also host to some 400
   recycling units.

   To a devout low-caste Hindu, the recycling process might offer solace,
   for through its gyrations rejected goods come back in new and valuable
   forms. At the first turn of the wheel is Ravi, a scavenger waiting
   outside a garbage wholesaler to unload his day's labour--a sack of
   paper and plastic plucked from Dharavi's rancid alleys. Ravi is
   balding, has rotten teeth and reckons he is 35.

   He says he arrived in Mumbai from Nagpur, Maharashtra, about 25 years
   ago, after fleeing a cruel stepmother. The journey took him a bit over
   three years, most of which he spent in prison; he was arrested aboard
   a train leaving Nagpur for travelling without a ticket. Since he got
   to Mumbai, he has spent every night on a nearby railway platform, and
   his days scavenging. Earning around 20 rupees (50 cents) per kilo of
   plastic litter, Ravi makes between 50 and 100 rupees a day--of which
   he aims to send 1,200 rupees a month to his younger sister in Nagpur.
   He has not been home, or seen her, since running away as a child. He
   explains this act of almost incredible selflessness thus: "I have no
   attachment to anyone except my sister."

   The wholesaler will rebag Ravi's plastic and sell it to a sorter for
   25 rupees a kilo. The recycling wheel turns again in a gloomy hutment
   in Jalil Compound in western Dharavi. In a blur of grubby hands, a row
   of five squatting youths rake a pile of plastic litter--bottle tops,
   machine parts and broken toys--between them, sorting it according to
   quality and colour. First in line is Mumtaz Ahmed, whose
   responsibility it is to pick out high-grade, thickly moulded plastic.
   A semi-schooled 18-year-old, who arrived from Uttar Pradesh six months
   ago, Mr Ahmed earns 100 rupees a day.

   The sorted plastic is ground into flakes, and sold to a
   granule-maker--such as Nausheed Khan, a tall and dapper Dharavi-born
   businessman. In his factory, the plastic flakes are washed, melted,
   squeezed into hard brown wires, then chopped into pellets. A local
   bucket-making factory buys this stuff for 35 rupees a kilo. Mr Khan,
   the head of a local chamber of commerce, expects to earn around
   100,000 rupees a month. He reckons it takes 150 scavenged plastic cups
   to make 100 cups of recycled plastic. Not every cup, alas, can be
   saved.

