
   A change in technique for the world's busiest executioners?

   CHINA'S leaders love talking about all the indicators that show China
   leading the world. Whether it is growth rates, production figures or
   trade volumes, officials relish any chance to unleash a barrage of
   dazzling statistics. They are less gung-ho about another category
   where China leaves the world trailing: use of the death penalty.
   Indeed, the number of Chinese criminal executions remains a state
   secret.

                                                                      AFP
                                                                      AFP

                                                    The old-fashioned way

   Foreign human-rights groups make valiant efforts to scour local press
   reports and tally the sums, but reckon they hear about only a fraction
   of the cases. In 2006 Amnesty International, a human-rights lobbying
   group, counted 2,790 people sentenced to death in China and 1,010
   executed. Other groups put annual executions at 7,500 or more. Even
   per head, using low estimates, China probably outstrips every country
   but Singapore. It also has a greater number of capital offences than
   anywhere else: more than 60. These include murder and other violent
   crimes, but also smuggling, drug trafficking and many "economic
   crimes" such as bribe-taking, embezzlement and even tax evasion.

   This month it was revealed that China is planning a big change. The
   traditional method of execution--a single bullet to the back of the
   convict's head--is to be replaced by a lethal injection. Jiang
   Xingchang, of the Supreme People's Court, told the press this is
   because injections are considered "more humane". The option was first
   authorised experimentally in China in 1997 and has since been used in
   many cities, including Kunming, Wuhan, Chengdu and Shanghai. Mr Jiang
   did not provide a timetable for an end to death by gunshot, but said
   the newer method has been favourably received by "all quarters of
   society, including those sentenced to death and their families."

   Some foreign critics disapprove. A statement from Amnesty said China's
   expanded use of lethal injections "flies in the face" of international
   trends away from capital punishment--which this year have seen even
   dictatorial Uzbekistan abandon the death penalty. The statement also
   cited the well-documented flaws in China's shoddy legal system and
   argued that a switch to lethal injection would do nothing to solve
   such problems as the arbitrary enforcement of the law or the execution
   of innocents. Recent years have seen a handful of cases in which
   Chinese defendants who had been sentenced to death, or even executed,
   were later found innocent. Chinese and foreign legal experts agree
   that an important cause of this, which China could do much more to
   eradicate, is the common police practice of extracting confessions
   through torture.

   There is also cause to challenge claims that lethal injections are
   more humane. This week America's Supreme Court began hearing a case,
   brought by two condemned inmates in Kentucky, alleging that injections
   can cause agonising pain, and thereby violate a constitutional bar on
   "cruel and unusual" punishment.

   In any event, China's interest in treating criminals more humanely has
   limits. This month the chief justice, Xiao Yang, said China might one
   day like to abolish capital punishment altogether. But that day would
   not dawn soon, because Chinese people believe strongly in the notion
   of an "eye for an eye and a life for a life". Not to mention tax
   evasion, of course.

