
   Violator becomes arbiter


   FOUR years of intense diplomacy bore fruit on November 30th when the
   Organisation for Security and Co-operation in Europe (OSCE) awarded
   its rotating chairmanship in 2010 to Kazakhstan. Since the decision,
   made at a meeting in Madrid, Kazakhstan's people have been treated to
   euphoric outbursts by their usually reserved top officials. Kanat
   Saudabayev, the state secretary (government spokesman), credited the
   remarkable achievement above all to the extraordinary wisdom of
   Kazakhstan's people when they elected the "truly God-sent Nursultan
   Nazarbayev" as their president in 1991.

   Such reverence to Kazakhstan's authoritarian head of state may well be
   a precondition of political longevity. But it is hardly what one would
   expect to hear in a country ready to lead a 56-member organisation
   that monitors human rights and elections. Human Rights Watch, a
   lobbying group, said the choice of Kazakhstan would undermine the
   integrity of the OSCE's human-rights principles.

   Indeed, the OSCE itself has so far failed to judge a single election
   in Kazakhstan free and fair. Yet the Kazakhstani leadership has now
   pledged to uphold and to strengthen its principles, in Mr Saudabayev's
   words, "from Vancouver to Vladivostok". Kazakhstan will become the
   first former Soviet republic to chair the OSCE. Dosym Satpayev, an
   independent political analyst, reckons its poor human-rights record
   and spotty democratic credentials were trumped by geopolitical
   calculation and hopes of energy co-operation with the oil-rich
   country.

   Mr Satpayev says that denying Kazakhstan the coveted honour might have
   alienated its leaders and driven it into closer ties with China, with
   which it is already linked through the Shanghai Co-operation
   Organisation, a security forum. Or it might have nudged the country
   even more firmly into the camp of Russia, Kazakhstan's staunchest
   supporter in OSCE decision-making councils. The chairmanship was the
   price paid to keep Kazakhstan on good terms with the West and to avoid
   further antagonising Russia, which is already squabbling with America
   over the course the OSCE should take.

   Whatever happened behind the scenes in Madrid, the political elite in
   Kazakhstan is jubilant that, as it sees it, the country has at last
   been accepted as an equal player in global affairs because of its
   democratic and free-market reforms. However, Marat Tazhin, the foreign
   minister, has stressed the great weight on Kazakhstan's shoulders if
   it is to live up to the OSCE's obligations. He promised a change of
   the election law by 2010 and a freer press. With Kazakhstan facing
   greater international scrutiny, the opposition may at least now have a
   chance to have its voice heard. Even so, Mr Satpayev concludes, "The
   OSCE has won tactically, but lost strategically."

