
   More sex please, we're Chinese cinema-goers

                                                                 ImageNet

                                  ImageNet

   IN A country awash with pirated films featuring explicit sex and
   violence, China's prudish censors risk irrelevance. Their heavy-handed
   treatment of two recent films has sparked a lively debate about
   whether cinemas should at last be allowed to show something racier.

   At present, films deemed unsuitable for children may not be shown to
   adults either. But the censors are under attack. Critics include Gong
   Li, a famous actress and government adviser, who last March appealed
   for a rating system that would give adults more choice. Complaints
   have mounted following the removal of sex scenes from "Lust, Caution",
   a spy thriller by a Taiwan-born Oscar-winning director, Ang Lee, and
   the outright banning this month of "Lost in Beijing", a sexually
   explicit drama by a Chinese director, Li Yu.

   The internet and rampant film piracy mean censors' cuts do not go
   unnoticed. Chinese internet users can readily find websites showing
   the expurgated parts of "Lust, Caution". Uncensored bootleg copies are
   peddled on the streets. The rapid growth of overseas tourism
   frustrates the censors too. The press reports that some Chinese travel
   agents have been offering trips to the cinema to see "Lust, Caution"
   uncut as part of their Hong Kong tour packages.

   The censors initially approved the showing of "Lost in Beijing",
   albeit in a heavily censored form. But just over a month after the
   film's debut in China, officials changed their minds. They accused the
   film company of circulating the censored sex scenes on the internet
   (the filmmakers blamed pirates) and banned the Beijing-based company
   from making films for the next two years.

   Officials have mentioned the possibility of eventually introducing a
   film-rating system, but they appear in no hurry. Communist Party
   conservatives abhor the idea of condoning explicit sex. One Beijing
   newspaper reported last year that officials were worried that a rating
   system would make it more difficult to curb the distribution in China
   of foreign films, many of which fail to meet current censorship
   standards.

   A quixotic attempt by a graduate student in Beijing, Dong Yanbin, to
   sue the censors for cutting the sex scenes out of "Lust, Caution"
   resulted in a predictable brush-off by a low-level court in the city.
   It said that the case could not be accepted unless the student could
   submit an uncensored version for comparison. Mr Dong prudently
   refrained from offering the court a pirated copy.

