
                                                                  Reuters

                                  Reuters

   Dissidents detect a slight thaw. But no one is hailing a Beijing
   spring


   FLANKED by plainclothes policemen, a former top Chinese official, now
   a leading dissident, greets a foreign journalist outside his apartment
   building. The police are welcoming too. After noting down the
   visitor's identity, they allow him to proceed to the dissident's flat
   to interview him. Only a few months ago, journalists were strictly
   barred. China's curtain of repression is not lifting. But it is
   twitching.

   This is a sensitive time of year in China. June 4th is the anniversary
   of the suppression of the Tiananmen Square protests in 1989. Most
   years since then, dissidents have tried to use the occasion to stage
   protests. Four days later falls the 50th anniversary of the
   "anti-rightist movement", a sweeping campaign launched by Mao Zedong
   to crush dissent. As usual, the state-controlled press is under orders
   to ignore these dates. Party leaders do not want to revive memories of
   past repression.

   The party still stamps on dissent. Human-rights activists and members
   of unauthorised religious groups are occasionally harassed or jailed.
   Liberal newspaper editors are sacked. Outspoken websites are closed
   down. Organised opposition to the party remains banned. But in the
   past few months, some dissidents say they have noticed an easing. One
   such is Bao Tong, the former senior official.

   Party leaders have reason to be worried about what Mr Bao (on the
   right above) might say. He was a top aide to the late Zhao Ziyang
   (left), who was Communist Party chief until he was deposed in 1989 for
   being too soft on the Tiananmen protesters. Mr Bao was a member of the
   party's Central Committee and the highest-ranking official jailed (for
   seven years) for his role in the unrest. In a still tightly secretive
   political system, Mr Bao, now 75, knows where the party buries its
   bodies.

   He links the authorities' decision to let him meet foreign--though not
   Chinese--journalists to this year's new regulations allowing the
   foreign media a freer rein in China around the Olympic Games in
   Beijing in August 2008. He does not see this as a big change of heart.
   Some 30 police are detailed to keep watch over him, he estimates.
   China is open, he says, as long as one does not criticise the party's
   leadership. Yet Mr Bao shows little restraint in attacking its
   corruption and repressive instincts, as well as one-party rule in
   general. Before Tiananmen, he says, liberal party officials reckoned
   there could be multi-candidate elections for the post of party chief
   by 2002. Now, he says, Chinese leaders are too afraid of losing
   control.

   This fear is reflected in the party's refusal to address the
   complaints of victims of the anti-rightist movement. By the party's
   own--very conservative--estimate, more than 500,000 intellectuals were
   subjected to punishment ranging from criticism and dismissal from
   their jobs to forced labour and imprisonment. In 1981, five years
   after the death of Mao, the party ruled that the anti-rightist
   movement had gone too far; all but a handful of those labelled as
   rightists were rehabilitated. But the party still maintained that it
   was right to have launched it.

   Mao Yushi, a prominent economist, is one of 60 of the movement's
   victims who launched a petition earlier this year calling for the
   campaign to be declared unconstitutional. He says there has been no
   response from the party. Mr Mao, now 78, says the movement turned it
   into a "party of liars", incapable of changing. Party leaders, he
   says, feel weak and are focused on maintaining stability. Any
   re-evaluation of the anti-rightist movement or of Tiananmen, they
   believe, could rock the boat.

   Holes in the net

   Yet both wittingly and unwittingly, the party is giving its critics
   more breathing space. The rapid spread of the internet has helped
   dissidents publicise their views and keep in contact. Hu Jia, a
   human-rights activist who campaigns for victims of HIV/AIDS, spent
   more than 200 days under virtual house arrest until early this year.
   His wife, Zeng Jinyan, posted reports on her blog. Mr Hu says police
   have this month again been stopping him from going out, except for a
   brief hospital visit, accusing him of threatening state security.

   But it is becoming less common in Beijing for dissidents to suffer
   such tight restrictions. Liu Xiaobo, a former lecturer once described
   by China's media as a "black hand" behind the Tiananmen unrest, and
   now a prolific online essayist, says the police have left him alone
   since early March. For the past two years they were posted
   continuously outside his home between March and June. Ding Zilin, who
   organises a group of mothers of Tiananmen victims, says foreign
   journalists have found it much easier this year to visit her apartment
   without official interference. Last month the authorities allowed two
   Tiananmen activists, Chen Ziming and Ren Wanding, to visit Hong
   Kong--the first time they had been allowed to leave the Chinese
   mainland since 1989.

   In recent months, Zhang Yihe, whose late father, Zhang Bojun, was one
   of the anti-rightist movement's most senior targets, has fought a
   spirited campaign against government censors after their attack on one
   of her books, about Chinese opera stars. Ms Zhang had apparently
   offended the powers-that-be with her previous writing about the
   sufferings of intellectuals, including her father, in the 1957
   campaign. Her online attacks against the censors, and her unavailing
   attempt to sue them, were widely supported by Chinese internet
   commentators. Ms Zhang says she is proud her father was a rightist.
   And cross though she is at the censors, they have done wonders, she
   says, for her sales.

