
   The Beijing Olympics raise tricky questions of religious freedom in
   China

   "CHINA is a country with religious freedom and respects every
   religion," boasts the [3]website of Beijing's Olympic games
   organisers. Expecting an influx of God-fearing athletes at next year's
   event, they will even cater to their spiritual needs. But China's
   wariness of foreign clergy is hard to overcome.

   In line with the International Olympic Committee's requirements,
   officials are setting up a religious centre in the Olympic village.
   Athletes will be able to attend services of their own faiths and seek
   counselling from chaplains. But, breaking with usual practice, China
   has not invited foreigners to serve as chaplains. The staff at the
   centre will belong to China's state-approved churches.

   Catholic priests from overseas were bound to be a problem. There have
   been some signs of a thaw in relations with the Vatican. This week
   Chinese clergy in the southern city of Guangzhou ordained the fourth
   bishop loyal to the Vatican to be appointed in China since September.
   But China has no diplomatic ties with the Vatican and several Catholic
   priests are in prison for refusing to co-operate with the
   state-controlled church.

   It also sometimes jails and harasses those Chinese Protestants who
   prefer to worship informally in unregistered "house churches". Foreign
   Protestants initially received positive signals. The state-supervised
   church invited them to help train Chinese clergy. But in March
   Beijing's Olympic organising committee told them that the foreigners
   themselves would not be invited to perform religious duties. No reason
   was given. Teams may still bring their own chaplains with them. But at
   past events many countries have not included chaplains in their own
   delegations, assuming that the host country would invite foreign
   clergy.

   China is uneasy about religious activities at the games. The Olympics
   normally draw many foreign Christian missionaries who, unlike the
   official chaplains, try to spread their faith. Proselytising is banned
   in China. Beijing's Olympic organisers avoid public comment on the
   foreign-chaplain issue, saying only that the religious needs of
   athletes will be met. In 2000 China's state-run news agency, Xinhua,
   reported that a Chinese Buddhist had been invited to serve as a
   chaplain at the Olympics in Sydney. So such needs should be familiar
   to Beijing's games organisers.

