
   A shortage of officer material is another sign of India's talent
   deficit

   A FULL-PAGE advertisement ran in many English-language newspapers in
   India on January 15th for the "Harbingers of Peace and Stability"--the
   country's 1.1m soldiers. The occasion, Army Day, is an annual
   celebration of the world's second-biggest regular force. Yet the army
   now has a particular need of publicity: in a country of over 1 billion
   people, it needs more officers. Harbingers of the right stuff are
   proving hard to find.

                                                                  Reuters

                                  Reuters

                          ...but not enough chiefs

   The army is short of 11,000 officers, almost a quarter of the total
   muster. Worse threatens. The shortage is most acute in the lower
   ranks, and the Indian Military Academy in Dehradun, a school for
   officer cadets, can currently fill only 86 of its 250 places. The army
   is also losing some of the officers that it now has: over 3,000 have
   applied for early retirement in the past three years. This week the
   army chief, General Deepak Kapoor, suggested that the government might
   one day have to introduce conscription.

   The general blamed the shortage of officer material, from which the
   navy and air force are suffering to lesser degrees, on India's zinging
   economy. Graduate hirelings of the country's trendiest
   computer-services companies can sometimes earn twice a junior
   officer's monthly salary of 20,000 rupees ($500). Moreover, the army
   has for decades been tangled up in nasty insurgencies in Kashmir and
   north-eastern India. And it has been hurt by a series of scandals,
   some involving corrupt top brass, others suicidal soldiers.

   To improve matters, the army is banking on a generous pay rise this
   year; it wants junior officers' salaries to be doubled. This would at
   least improve its bid for India's small pool of well-educated
   graduates. But, given soaring wage inflation in private firms, which
   are also struggling to hire the talent they need, it would not fix the
   problem.

   That will require a bigger talent pool. After all, there is no
   shortage of young Indians who want an army career--or indeed, given
   persistent high unemployment, any sort of career. The problem is that
   only a privileged minority of school- and college-leavers can pass the
   army's entrance exams for officer training. In order to match India's
   rise to global importance, the army needs many things: more money,
   better technology and a coherent foreign policy on which to build its
   doctrine. Above all, however, like all India, it needs more decent
   schools.

