
                                                                    Panos

                                   Panos

   The residents of Dharavi, allegedly Asia's biggest slum, are thriving
   in hardship 

   AROUND 6am, the squealing of copulating rats--signalling a night-long
   verminous orgy on the rooftops of Dharavi, a slum in Mumbai--gives way
   to the more cheerful sound of chirruping sparrows. Through a small
   window in Shashikant ("Shashi") Kawale's rickety shack, daylight
   seeps. It reveals a curly black head outside. Further inspection shows
   that this is attached to a man's sleeping body, on a slim metal ledge,
   12 feet above the ground.

   With maybe a million residents, crammed into a square mile of low-rise
   wood, concrete and rusted iron, Dharavi is a squeeze. And in Shashi's
   family hutment--as slum-dwellings are known in Mumbai, where half the
   city's 14m people live in one--it feels like it. As the sparrows stir,
   so do the neighbours. Through the plank-thin walls of the tiny loft
   where Shashi, a jobbing cleric-cum-social-worker, lives above his
   parents, come the sounds of people bumping and bickering.

   On one side is a family of 12 living in a 90-square-foot room--about
   half the size of an American car-parking space. On the other, eight
   people share a similar area. Night-sounds suggest they include a man
   with a painful cough, a colicky baby and an amorous couple. At least
   they can squeeze inside, unlike the man roosting behind Shashi's
   hutment--and unlike Parapa Kawale, a 22-year-old friend and neighbour,
   who had dropped by the previous evening to share a spicy bean curry.

   Parapa, a semi-skilled electrician, lived with his parents, two
   brothers, their wives and two children in a room of 48 square feet. If
   half the family members slept on their sides, they could just about
   fit. But as the only single male, Parapa felt a dreadful gooseberry.
   Like Shashi, he is a member of the local branch of the Communist Party
   of India (Marxist), which tells Dharavi's youths not to marry unless
   they can support a family. Wretched nonetheless at the nightly
   coupling around him, Parapa began sleeping in the alley outside--and
   drinking heavily.

   A month ago, explained Parapa, a strapping, beaming, Chaucerian
   fellow, he chased one of his brothers and a wife from the hutment in a
   violent, drunken rage. They fled back to the remote village in
   southern Karnataka that the family emerged from three decades before.
   Parapa then fixed a man-sized plank to the hutment wall, so that while
   his father and brother made love to their wives below, he could stay
   chastely on the shelf. Still, he sometimes sleeps outside, beside an
   open sewer, in the blissful quietude of the street.

   During a four-day stay in Dharavi, as the guest of Shashi and his
   friends, your correspondent heard many such tales: of hard times,
   facing up and getting by. The narrators were sometimes bitter or
   suspicious, but mostly friendly, almost invariably courteous, and
   occasionally, like Parapa, very funny. If poverty can seem
   dehumanising from afar--especially in much reporting on it--up close
   Dharavi, which is allegedly Asia's biggest slum, is vibrantly and
   triumphantly alive.

   Soon after 6am, in the metre-wide street outside Shashi's hutment, an
   ugly morning ritual has begun. "It's my turn! My husband needs to get
   to work!" a woman shouts, in jostling over a water tap. In Shiva
   Shakti Nagar, a slum area of dalits (former "untouchables") from rural
   Maharashtra, there is a tap for every ten houses, or roughly 100
   people. "Push off! My kids are late for school!" another woman lashes
   back.

   All along the street, water is gushing into blue plastic tanks and
   aluminium tubs, washing sticky breakfast dishes clean. It flows down
   the street in a rippling sheet. Bisecting it is an open drain, which
   gushes torrentially, flushing away the detritus of the previous day.

   From the stink of this, it includes a lot of human excrement--which
   tiny naked children, squatting with their backsides jutting over the
   torrent, are busy adding to. In fact, it is not supposed to be used
   for this purpose. The locals are instead supposed to take their turn
   at a block of 16 public latrines, serving 300 hutments (or 3,000
   people). It costs a rupee a visit--or 30 rupees (75 cents) for a
   monthly family ticket.

   Outside the men's side of the block, a line of bleary-eyed dalits are
   silently waiting. Most are still dressed for bed, in cotton shawls and
   sarongs--for custom dictates that they purge before washing.
   Wordlessly, they usher this foreigner to the front of the queue. And
   he remembers words of welcome uttered by another Dharavi Marxist, Raju
   Korde: "A guest is from God, but I'm worried that you won't like our
   toilets." Happily, the Asian-style loos are as clean as they could
   possibly be.

   At 7am the early shift begins in Dharavi's 15,000 hutment factories.
   Typically, they consist of one or two jerry-built storeys, stuffed
   with boys and men sewing cotton, melting plastic, hammering iron and
   moulding clay. Indeed, it is for its industry, not its size, that
   Dharavi is most distinctive. The clothes, pots, toys and recycled
   materials its residents produce earn them millions of dollars in
   annual exports alone. As the sun climbs over Dharavi, a rising timpani
   of metal on metal, a whirring of small machinery, indicate that the
   working-day has begun.

   Ramesh Kadam is at his desk in the Peela Bangla (Yellow Bungalow)
   tannery company. One of the oldest in Dharavi, it occupies the same
   factory, beside a stinking black creek, that Mr Kadam's grandfather
   founded in 1918. The site was chosen for its proximity to the main
   slaughterhouse of Bombay, as Mumbai was called. Handling meat and
   tanning leather are considered unclean in Hinduism, so the factory was
   built out of sight, on an island, with villagers of the lowly Koli
   fishing caste mending their nets on its shore. Indeed, much of Dharavi
   was underwater at that time. And so it is today when the monsoon
   comes, flooding the slum with black creek water and sewage.

                                                                    Panos

                                   Panos

                    Shashikant Kawale, a courteous host

   As Bombay boomed, on the back of its port and textile mills, poor
   peasants flowed in from the land. During periodic famines--including
   one in Bengal in 1943 that killed 3m people--they came in spate.
   Dharavi is where these migrants claimed--or reclaimed--a plot.
   Shashi's parents were propelled from Karnataka by a drought, arriving
   in the city with five small children in 1976. "In the village we were
   starving," says his mother, Shantabai, creator of the tasty bean
   curry. "Here, we were poor, but we could eat."

   Mr Korde's parents, landless vagrants from central Maharashtra,
   trekked in around the same time. His father died recently of
   tuberculosis, after a career spent hefting sacks of lentils in a
   factory. His mother, Leelabaiy, a pugnacious 65-year-old jangling with
   green bangles, lives with Mr Korde and his wife and two children in a
   three-room slum-house. Unlike her husband, she had some schooling, and
   retains a slightly sophisticated air. Asked why she married down, she
   lifts up seven fingers--one for each of the elder sisters who had
   first to be found a husband and dowry.

   With this history, Dharavi's population is diverse. Tamils, Andhras,
   Assamese, Biharis, Bengalis and local Maharatis; all India's peoples
   are here. Perhaps a little over half belong to India's poorest groups:
   dalits and Muslims. They tend to live semi-ghettoised, as in Shiva
   Shakti Nagar, within the same language group. Indeed, the poorer
   Dharavi's residents are, the more caste-sensitive they are likely to
   be. Mr Kadam is a dhor, of the dalit tanning caste. Yet as his
   business thrived, his family became middle class, a powerful identity.
   Last year Mr Kadam exported 25,000 leather belts to Wal-Mart in
   America. He has moved his family from Dharavi to a smart suburb of
   Mumbai. Laughing proudly, he says his teenage son refuses to visit the
   ancestral factory, which he considers dirty.

   The four children of Venkatesh Dhobi, all aged ten years and under,
   cannot shun their ancestral pool of filth. They work every day in this
   well of brown water, beside a litter-strewn railway line. They pass
   unwashed clothes into the pool, where 20 adult dhobis--of the dalit
   washer caste--soak and scrub them. With an explosive grunt to keep
   rhythmic time--a sound not unlike that emitted by Japanese Noh theatre
   actors--together they thwack the heavy sopping clothes onto smooth
   stones. The children then strew them between the railway tracks to
   dry.

   They are the fifth generation of Dhobis to work at this pool. The
   first, says Mr Dhobi, was his great-grandmother, who arrived from
   Mehaboob Nagar, in Andhra Pradesh, a century ago. "For 100 years, we
   have served this city," says Mr Dhobi, a short 35-year-old with the
   torso of an underpants model. And yet their rural roots have survived.
   All the dhobis in the pool--which is called Dhobi Ghat--are from
   Mehaboob Nagar. Aged 14, Mr Dhobi was married there to a local girl.
   The big changes of the past century, in his view, seem to be that
   Dhobi Ghat has got much dirtier and people send fewer clothes to be
   washed in it. India's swelling middle class--people like Mr
   Kadam--prefer washing-machines. Together, Mr Dhobi, his wife and four
   children earn less than 200 rupees a day.

   Dharavi's diversity can be a problem. In 1992 communal rioting swept
   Bombay, sparking battles in the slum between Hindus and Muslims.
   Around 200 people were killed. But multi-culturalism is also a
   blessing. Unlike the city's more homogeneous shanties--including a
   rusty sprawl of 300,000 mostly Maharatis along the runways of the
   city's airport--Dharavi is too fractured, and massive, to be claimed
   as a vote-bank by any gangster-politician.

   But the slum has known gangsters. In the 1970s a godfather of the
   Bombay mafia, Vardarajan Mudaliyar, more or less ruled it. Using the
   slum's large Tamil community--his own--as a base, he ran moonshine and
   prostitution rackets. He also claimed ownership over thousands of
   illegal hutments, and extracted rents from their occupants. So did his
   gangster rivals. In those days, Dharavi was dangerous.

   It has become safer for two main reasons. One is that in 1976 the
   state government gave the slum-dwellers limited rights over their
   hutments. They were recognised as "identified encroachers", a status
   guaranteeing compensation in the event that the government bulldozed
   their shanties. In return, the government began collecting peppercorn
   rents--currently around 100 rupees a month for each hutment--on the
   encroached land. It also started supplying Dharavi with mains water
   and power, which the gangsters hitherto had stolen from the city and
   sold in the slum. This step put the slumlords out of business, and
   started a modest property boom. Today, tiny hutments in Dharavi are
   sold, without title, for 500,000 rupees.

   Not all Dharavi is benefiting. Rajiv Gandhi Nagar, a huddle of
   hutments behind Mr Kadam's tannery, still has almost no mains power or
   water. In a shack cut into a bank of rubbish, overlooking Mumbai's
   plush Bandra Kurla business district, Karnla Ishwar, an aged widow and
   day-labourer, describes the cost of this. She buys water by the bucket
   an arduous ten-minute walk away. She buys electricity, at 100 rupees
   per appliance per month (plus a 500-rupee deposit), from a neighbour.

   But Ms Ishwar is unlucky. With reliable power and water, many of
   Dharavi's residents have been able to start businesses inside the
   slum. In this they had a great advantage--the other main reason for
   the slum's rise. As Bombay expanded, so Dharavi became the heart of
   India's commercial capital. Indeed, in a city of notoriously rotten
   infrastructure, the slum is a transport hub. It is sandwiched between
   Mumbai's two main railway lines and ringed by six stations. In
   addition, Dharavi's hutment industrialists enjoy the competitive
   advantages of slum-life: cheap labour and an environment where
   government inspectors fear to tread.

   Mr Korde, a portly 40-year-old, has seized this opportunity. The son
   of an unlettered vagrant, he has a business degree from Mumbai
   University and several small companies: a mobile-phone shop, a
   printing business, also a share in a co-operative bank. He reckons to
   earn 25,000 rupees a month. A decade ago, he bought his slum-house, on
   the western edge of Dharavi, for 450,000 rupees. Its value has almost
   doubled. "I am a Marxist and also an entrepreneur," he says, a trifle
   defensively, in the nearby office of the Communist Party, seated
   beneath colourful portraits of Stalin, Lenin, Engels and Marx.

                                                                    Panos

                                   Panos

                     Venkatesh Dhobi, swamped with work

   An evening stroll through Dharavi with Mr Korde, a well-liked local,
   is inspiring. Think 19th-century boom-time Brooklyn. In
   fluorescent-strip-lit shops, in snatched exchanges in the pedestrian
   crush, as a hookah is passed around a tea-stall, again and again, the
   stories are the same. Everyone is working hard and everyone is moving
   up. All Mr Korde's friends--or their fathers--arrived in Dharavi much
   poorer than they are now. Most own at least one business. Some of
   these slum-dwellers employ several hundred people.

   Aftab Khan is typical. A tailor with a trim moustache, and scholarly
   wire-rimmed spectacles, he arrived from Uttar Pradesh (UP) 20 years
   ago, with little more than a needle. He now employs a dozen
   youths--all recruited in his native village--to turn out 150 items of
   children's clothing a day. In workhouse fashion, they eat and sleep
   where they labour, in the upper two floors of a hutment. Reachable
   only by a ladder and rope, this resembles nothing so much as a
   tree-house with sewing-machines. Yet for their drudgery, the
   apprentices earn 200 rupees a day--about four times a rural wage in
   UP.

   The evening is darkening. And beside a barrow heaped with bright
   orange vermicelli--a sticky fibre eaten during the Muslim festival of
   eid--Mr Korde introduces a local celebrity. He calls himself Raja
   Bhai, or King Brother. A handsome Bihari, and comic, Raja Bhai has in
   15 years built a garment business employing 200 people. His success is
   impressive. Yet it has left him exposed to the predators of the
   informal economy: rent-seeking officials. To protect himself, he is
   now launching a second career, in politics.

   In Dharavi, Raja Bhai is looking for a ticket with the Congress party,
   for the next municipal, or even state, election. Meanwhile he is
   campaigning for the Lok Jan Shakti party, a champion of low-caste
   Biharis, in his native state. Either way, he is sure he will soon get
   elected office--and with it the clout he will need to drive away the
   shake-down merchants.

   For thousands of men like these, Dharavi is a wonderful opportunity.
   But for millions of Mumbaikers, it represents a cost. Their city,
   South Asia's biggest, is choking. Its infrastructure is a crumbling
   disaster. And yet over the next decade, the UN says the population of
   Mumbai will almost double, making it the world's second-biggest city
   after Tokyo. Massive urban redevelopment is required--starting with
   Dharavi, at the city's heart. By one estimate, the slum's land alone
   represents $10 billion in dead capital.

   For a decade, the state government has tried coaxing the slum-dwellers
   to let it bulldoze their hutments and build high-rise apartments
   instead. Each dispossessed family is entitled to a flat of 225 square
   feet. After 30 years, they will be allowed to sell it. But only a few
   have accepted this offer. So now the government is trying to enforce
   it. In August it put the bulldozing and redevelopment of Dharavi, in
   six parcels, out to tender. The work was due to begin this year. But
   it has been stalled by bad press nationally and local protests,
   organised by Mr Korde.

   For small businessmen like him, the redevelopment plan is a nightmare.
   The slum's hutment factories, havens from tax and regulation, would be
   destroyed. In their place would be purpose-built workshops, for rent
   at commercial rates. "I will be finished," says Mr Khan, the scholarly
   looking tailor. For poorer residents, like Ms Ishwar, the widow living
   in rubbish-blown misery, the story would be different. Her new
   apartment, unlike her current hovel, would be fit for human
   habitation. If she, or rather her relatives, sold it, they would be
   rich. Either way, Mr Korde admits, the scheme will eventually happen.

                                                                  Eyevine

                                  Eyevine

                  Business is piling up for the recyclers

   So, these may be the last days for Dharavi. If so, much that is
   wretched will be lost. And, who knows, maybe something better will
   arise. Most of the slum-dwellers doubt this. And a few high-rise
   blocks, scattered across the slum, do not inspire great hope. Many are
   half-built and slowly mildewing. Lots of their residents, it is said,
   have already sold up illegally, and moved back to the slums, seeking
   things that town-planners cannot provide: a sense of history,
   community and freedom. Dharavi has these, as well as many horrible
   problems. It is organic and miraculously harmonious. It is intensely
   human. Unlike the random tower-blocks, Dharavi makes sense.

   It is 2am, and a violent drumming erupts outside Mr Korde's house.
   Booming in a six-beat rhythm, it ends in a crashing roll. This is
   repeated, again and again, rising as the drummers approach. The sound
   is thunderous. A few huge rats rush by the window, fleeing the noise
   like driven pheasants. And suddenly the drummers appear, parading
   through the slum, dragging on wheels a huge statue of Durga--a Hindu
   goddess, a multi-limbed and multi-coloured giantess, astride a tiger.

   On the drum-roll, the processors pause, and golden flares explode
   either side of the statue. In every doorway, along the alley,
   slum-dwellers are watching in silence. It is a thrilling and
   dream-like sight. This is apparently quite normal in Dharavi.

