
   The war is brought home to Kabul's well-protected foreigners

   THE [3]website for the Serena Hotel in Kabul used to describe it as
   "an oasis of luxury in a war-ravaged city". Afghanistan's only
   five-star hotel is also a virtual fortress, surrounded by blast
   barriers, metal detectors, multiple reinforced gates and heavily armed
   guards. They proved inadequate defences against a four-man Taliban
   suicide squad that blasted its way into the lobby and then the hotel's
   spa on January 14th, killing eight staff and guests. Among those left
   cowering in the basement as American commandos hunted the bombers was
   Norway's foreign minister, Jonas Gahr Stoere, who had been holding a
   meeting in a place seen as secure.

   The 140 suicide attacks in Afghanistan in 2007 were almost all aimed
   at Western or Afghan security forces. This was the first by the
   Taliban to make Kabul's expatriates a direct target. So far they have
   remained oddly cocooned from the violence in the south of the country,
   which took some 6,500 lives last year. Foreigners can still walk
   around Kabul with only modest caution. There are restaurants, bars and
   even brothels catering to the several thousand expatriates: mainly
   aid-workers, diplomats and security contractors.

   The use of a suicide squad recalled the tactics of Pakistani jihadist
   organisations. The Afghan security forces were quick to accuse a
   Pakistan-based Taliban commander, Sirajuddin Haqqani, of plotting the
   attack. After the Serena bombing, a Taliban spokesman threatened
   similar violence against Western restaurants. All of this has sent a
   chill through Kabul's foreign residents. But this is still not
   Baghdad. Few of Kabul's inhabitants support the Taliban or want to see
   Western troops or aid agencies leave. There are 20,000 Western and
   Afghan troops defending the city.

   Before the attack there had been explicit security warnings. In the
   hours afterwards Afghan forces reportedly arrested many of the
   suicide-bombers' support team. The strength of the Taliban in the
   provinces close to Kabul does appear to be growing. But, backed by
   Western intelligence agencies, Kabul's security services seem to be
   growing more effective.

   However, the fear remains that if bombers started killing large
   numbers of expatriates they might force the withdrawal of some Western
   aid agencies and perhaps even the UN. That would be bad news for the
   international reconstruction effort, and worse still for the Afghan
   people.

