
   Corruption, nepotism and impunity threaten the peace process

   IN SEPTEMBER last year a warrant was issued for the arrest of Sitaram
   Prasain, who was accused of stealing $4.3m from his own bank. This
   plunged the partly state-owned outfit, set up to lend to small
   businesses, into insolvency. Yet somehow the police could not find
   him. He seemed invisible, even when many of the country's top
   politicians attended his son's lavish wedding. For many Nepalis, this
   was all too typical of a system where the rich and privileged are
   above the law.

   When the Young Communist League, a squad of thugs run by Nepal's
   Maoists, kidnapped Mr Prasain this month and paraded him in front of
   the press before handing him to the police, there was an almighty row.
   Girija Koirala, the irate prime minister, called them the "Young
   Criminal League". The Maoist leader, known as Prachanda, retorted that
   it was Mr Koirala who consorted with criminals. Ashish Thapa, of
   Transparency International, an anti-corruption watchdog, points out
   that Mr Prasain had given generously to various political parties.

   The Maoists, whose ten-year insurgency ended in a messy truce last
   year, are now partners in an interim government, while the chaotic
   country pursues a permanent peace. Yet the Prasain affair suggests
   that peace needs at least some integrity in public life. Aside from
   short-lived, politically motivated episodes, no one can recall anybody
   important in Nepal ever being punished for anything.

   The Supreme Court itself is bound up in the culture of impunity.
   Earlier this year an unsuccessful litigant released recordings of his
   efforts to win a property dispute through bribery. No action has been
   taken. Yet the judiciary has a vital role in the peace process, both
   in hearing important constitutional cases and in a planned "truth and
   reconciliation" process over the many human-rights abuses committed by
   both sides to the conflict.

   The Maoists, while posing as the party of justice, also look shady.
   There are many reports of their involvement in illegal logging. (A
   Maoist, as it happens, holds the cabinet portfolio covering forestry,
   traditionally seen as a lucrative sinecure.) And there has never been
   a proper accounting for millions of dollars in finance-ministry
   cheques payable to Krishna Mahara, a Maoist leader. The money was
   intended to pay for disarming and demobilising the Maoists' fighters.
   Transparency's Mr Thapa thinks the Maoists in fact have more
   ways--legal and otherwise--to raise revenue than any other party, and
   have amassed large sums of money.

   The police, too, have a big role to play in establishing law and order
   before and during elections due this autumn. Yet listening to a group
   of mid-ranking officers discussing their hopes for juicy job postings
   does not inspire confidence. The luckiest among them might end up with
   a casino on their beat, with attendant opportunities for kickbacks.
   Since Mr Koirala, from the Congress Party, became prime minister last
   year many officers with Congress links have been promoted.

   "It goes to the feudal character of our society," says Devendra
   Panday, a former finance minister who is now a campaigner for peace
   and democracy. "In the patron-client system there is no incentive to
   clamp down on corruption." Nepotism and party bias in appointments
   undermine institutions. "The country is full of incompetent people as
   well as corrupt ones."

   Cynicism about the way things work is all-pervasive--and extends to
   foreign aid. International donors are big providers of good jobs for
   the local elite. Many able young people in Kathmandu, who lack the
   connections, have concluded that only the upper classes need apply. In
   the unhappy villages, where most people live and development is yet to
   come, peasants are quick to assume, rightly or wrongly, that money
   intended for them has been stolen higher up the system. Others contend
   that it is simply wasted by people too rich to understand their
   problems. Such resentments fuelled the Maoists' "people's war". Yet
   the system that breeds them shows no sign of changing.

