
   The Tigers and the government match outrage with outrage

                                                                  Reuters
                                                                  Reuters

                                           Prabhakaran's fearful symmetry


   THE annual speech by Velupillai Prabhakaran, chieftain of the
   Liberation Tigers of Tamil Eelam, to mark "Heroes' Day" on November
   27th is anxiously awaited by Sri Lankans. The elusive separatist
   leader often uses it to reveal his macabre or heroic plans for the
   coming months. This year, however, there were no prizes for guessing
   his intentions. Both the Tigers, fighting for a Tamil homeland
   ("eelam"), and the hawkish government in Colombo had already made
   their positions plain: the 24-year-old war, which has claimed more
   than 70,000 civilian lives, will be stepped up.

   A few hours before Mr Prabhakaran's speech, the air force bombed the
   Tigers' radio station, killing nine civilian staff. So it was
   circulated by telephone and the internet. Combative as ever, Mr
   Prabhakaran declared that it would be "naive" to expect any peaceful
   solution from the Sinhalese-dominated government, and exhorted Tamils
   to fight on.

   It did not take him long to translate words into action. The next day
   he sent a disabled Tamil woman with a bomb strapped to her chest in a
   failed attempt to assassinate an ethnic-Tamil government minister seen
   as a "traitor" to the cause. The same day a bomb killed 20 people in a
   shopping mall in Colombo. The violence seemed a rebuff to foreign
   governments, which had been asking the Tigers to stop political
   assassinations and terrorist attacks, to win world support for a
   decent deal for the Tamils.

   As in the past, the Sri Lankan government soon squandered some of the
   sympathy it was due. It randomly arrested 2,554 Tamils in and around
   Colombo and put 400 of them in Boosa, a detention camp for terrorist
   suspects. Human-rights groups were outraged. On December 4th a
   petition was filed in the Supreme Court. Recalling the court's angry
   response in June when it had summarily ejected 376 Tamils from
   Colombo, the government hurried to free 2,352 people that very day.

