
   Having successfully ousted a king, Nepal is still looking for peace 

   JUST four months after huge demonstrations forced King Gyanendra to
   relinquish absolute power, protest has become a way of life in Nepal.
   Its latest success came on August 20th, when, after violent
   demonstrations in Kathmandu and elsewhere, the government rescinded
   its attempt to raise the prices of kerosene, diesel and petrol.
   Unfortunately, the goal that motivated many to join the original
   revolt earlier this year is proving harder to reach: a lasting peace
   in the ten-year civil war with Maoist insurgents.

                                                                       AP

                                     AP

                     Prachanda the potential Octobrist

   Still, it seems tantalisingly close. The Maoists are observing a
   ceasefire, and in June agreed to join an interim government with the
   seven-party alliance of democratic parties that backs Girija Prasad
   Koirala, the prime minister. There would then be elections--as early
   as next April--to an assembly to draft a new constitution. This month
   the Maoists accepted that their fighters would be confined to
   cantonments, where the United Nations would monitor them. The
   government's army would be confined to its barracks. A beefed-up
   United Nations presence, to be led by Ian Martin, a veteran of the
   transition in East Timor, and now head of a much-praised UN
   human-rights operation in Nepal, is to be announced shortly.

   Every element of this seemingly neat arrangement, however, is
   uncertain. The parties, for example, are loth to let the Maoists join
   the government until they have disarmed. But so far they have not even
   agreed to be separated from their weapons in the cantonments. "Unless
   and until this reactionary, cruel, ruthless royal army is disbanded,"
   says Dev Gurung, a senior Maoist negotiator, "the people will still
   need their weapons."

   Some of the democratic politicians, such as Prakash Saran Mahat, a
   former foreign minister, agree that the army remains a threat, albeit
   a subdued one. However, he says, "it could stage a coup, but not
   create problems at the grass roots." The Maoists could do the latter.
   Their leader, Pushpa Kamal Dahal, better known as Prachanda, has said
   he has 30,000-35,000 soldiers, who would be confined, and a further
   100,000 militia members, who would not. Since these are responsible
   for much intimidation and extortion in the countryside, they might
   make it hard to hold free and fair elections.

   Next, there are fundamental disagreements over the formation of an
   interim government and a body to replace the parliament. The Maoists
   want the interim constitution to declare Nepal a republic, rather than
   let the constituent assembly decide that. But among the parties, there
   is still some support for a ceremonial role for the monarchy. One of
   the big mainstream parties, known as the UML (for Unified
   Marxist-Leninist), has suggested that a referendum on the role of the
   king be held simultaneously with the assembly elections. Its leader,
   Madhav Kumar Nepal, claims that Prachanda, who insists the monarchy is
   already "suspended", agrees with this.

   Also troubling is the Maoist insistence that the interim constitution
   reflect "ethnic federalism"--ie, a division into autonomous regions.
   Mr Gurung says the model would be a "multinational country, like
   Switzerland". But Nepal's complex mix of ethnic groups defies
   geographical division. Resentments kept in check by the monarchy and
   then civil war are already re-emerging.

   While optimists hope Nepal will become a Himalayan Switzerland, a
   gloomier assessment, from the American ambassador, James Moriarty,
   compared the country to Russia between February and October 1917. The
   Maoists, critics say, have not stopped recruiting fighters. According
   to Subodh Pyakurel, who runs INSEC, a human-rights group, they have
   abducted more than 300 people since April, and extortion is rampant.
   Prachanda himself has threatened an "October Revolution" if talks with
   the parties fail. The best hope, in the judgment of many dealing with
   him, is that, given a choice, he would prefer to keep talking than
   resume fighting.

