
   Pakistan's madrassas may be less of a problem than its mainstream
   schools


   THE "battle" for Pakistani minds is sometimes not a figurative one. A
   bloody clash erupted last month when security forces prevented
   pro-Taliban militants from recruiting pupils for jihad at a private
   secondary school in North-West Frontier Province (NWFP). General
   Pervez Musharraf, Pakistan's president, casts such incidents as part
   of a struggle between his "enlightened moderation" and obscurantist
   militants. But critics say General Musharraf is failing in one
   important arena. His five-year old plan to reform Pakistan's madrassas
   is "in shambles", according to a report last week by the International
   Crisis Group, a research and policy outfit.

   Pakistan's real educational battlefield, however, is less in its
   madrassas than in its rotten mainstream schools and universities. In
   the absence of a decent education, points out Javed Ashraf Qazi, the
   education minister, "illiterate masses become ready recruits for all
   sorts of unhealthy activities." Perhaps recognising this, America has
   not wasted a dime on madrassa reform. But it has pledged $256m for
   mainstream education between 2002 and 2007.

   Officially, 53% of Pakistanis are literate. Others say the figure is
   nearer 30%. Literacy, often defined as no more than the ability to
   write one's name, is as low as 3% among women in some rural areas.
   Pakistan has a rapidly ballooning population of 160m with over 85m
   people below the age of 19. The education system, left to atrophy for
   30 years, is crippled by every possible ill: crumbling classrooms,
   poor teaching materials, untrained and truant teachers and endemic
   corruption.

   It is not all grim. The government is taking education more seriously
   and pouring in more resources. In the province of Punjab, which has a
   population of 83.7m, the World Bank has ploughed $850m into
   educational reform. Over the past three years more than 1m children
   have been enrolled in Punjabi schools for the first time. The
   provincial government has introduced free textbooks, a $4 monthly
   stipend for girls, a teacher-training scheme and has cancelled token
   school fees. Like NWFP, Punjab has purged its textbooks of much
   pro-jihad and anti-Indian propaganda.

   But the good news ends there. Poorer provinces have been unable to
   cash in. Baluchistan, blighted by a low-level separatist insurgency,
   has been able to increase spending by only 20-30%. Across Pakistan as
   a whole, only 52% of primary-school-age pupils attend school. Of
   those, nearly one-third will drop out. Only 22% of girls above the age
   of ten complete primary schooling, compared with 47% of boys.

   Some 3,500 schools do not have a building; of those that do, 4,000 are
   classed as "dangerous"; 29,000 schools have no electricity; 14,000
   have no drinking water; 22,000 do not have a toilet; 4,000 consist of
   a single classroom; and fewer than 100 secondary schools have science
   labs. The quality of education is still poor, and the government is
   far off its target of providing universal primary education by 2015.

   The private sector, which accounts for 30% of primary and secondary
   education, fares little better. Private schools are mostly
   over-subscribed, poorly paid and staffed by badly trained teachers.
   Many "English-medium" schools, offering to bridge the social divide
   between the anglophone elite and the "masses", are a swindle. Pupils
   are instructed mainly in Urdu. Nevertheless, educationalists are
   concerned that the divide between schools is reinforcing the social
   chasm.

   To be fair, the government is seeking to combat these woes. It has
   pledged to boost spending on education from 2.5% of GDP to 4%. But
   similar promises were made last year. Already some 40% of the
   education budget is returned to the exchequer because of a lack of
   "capacity", or the failings of a cumbersome bureaucracy.

   Pakistan's higher education has received the most obvious boost of
   energy and money. A Higher Education Commission was created in 2002
   and is run by a distinguished hyperactive organic chemist,
   Atta-ur-Rahman. With an annual budget of $449m, Mr Rahman has sent
   hundreds of students abroad on scholarships, embarked on a
   university-building spree, published lists in newspapers of dubious
   degree-givers, hunted down plagiarists and introduced
   performance-related incentives to improve teaching quality and
   research. Respected academics, such as Abdul Hameed Nayyar, believe
   that the haste of some of the reforms has "actually degraded higher
   education". Even if that is unfair, the present flurry of educational
   enthusiasm may not make a lasting difference. Its chances remain
   hostage to Pakistan's chronic political instability.

