
   The BJP picks its octogenarian

                                                                      AFP

                                    AFP

                    Advani's number one--for the moment


   INDIA'S Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP) has been in a mess since it
   unexpectedly lost the general election of 2004 to a coalition led by
   the Congress party. Leadership and policy squabbles have hampered its
   effectiveness in opposition, and no strong figure has emerged to take
   charge following the gradual retirement of Atal Bihari Vajpayee, a
   former prime minister whose equanimity fudged many of the party's
   harsher Hindu-nationalist policies. Now the party hopes to reverse
   that decline.

   At 82 and unwell, Mr Vajpayee has endorsed his colleague of over 30
   years, Lal Krishna Advani, the head of the party in Parliament, as the
   BJP's prime-ministerial candidate in the next general election. But Mr
   Advani, whose new role was announced on December 10th, is 80 and,
   though leaner and fitter than Mr Vajpayee, will have a tough time
   reimposing discipline and renewing vigour in what used to be one of
   India's more orderly parties.

   Mr Advani has been seen as a leading hardliner since he led a march in
   1992 that demolished an ancient Muslim mosque on a disputed religious
   site in Ayodhya, sparking widespread riots. In recent years he has
   tried to soften his image, even to the extent of making generous
   remarks about Muhammad Ali Jinnah, the founder of Pakistan, when he
   visited India's neighbour two years ago. That was too much for the
   BJP's parent organisation, the Rashtriya Swayamsevak Sangh (RSS),
   which forced his resignation as party president. He was replaced by
   Rajnath Singh, a capable administrator and regional politician in his
   mid-50s, who seemed to embody the generational shift that the party
   needs. Since then, however, Mr Singh has failed to become a unifying
   leader.

   The next general election is not due till 2009, so naming a
   prime-ministerial candidate could have been left a while--had it not
   been for two things. The first is the prospect of a snap poll if
   leftist parties withdraw their support for the government over India's
   proposed nuclear deal with America. Prakash Karat, leader of the
   biggest of the communist parties, gave warning recently that he would
   do just that by the end of this month if the government continued its
   current talks on the deal with the Vienna-based International Atomic
   Energy Agency.

   The second is the possibility of a leadership bid by Narendra Modi,
   the BJP's controversial and egotistical chief minister in Gujarat,
   whose approach to Muslims makes Mr Advani look like a softie. Polling
   is now taking place in Gujarat's assembly elections and Mr Modi's
   national ambitions would be "virtually unstoppable" if the BJP won,
   says Mahesh Rangarajan, a political analyst. That would be a problem
   in the rest of the party because Mr Modi alienates the RSS and others
   in the BJP with his centralising, autocratic style. Even more
   important, as prime minister he would find it virtually impossible to
   attract allies to a national coalition government if the BJP were the
   victor. With no other BJP politician of national stature, the party
   had little choice but to turn to Mr Advani for the moment. But in the
   long run others will have to emerge if Mr Modi is to be contained: he
   is only 57, and has a couple of decades to go, judging by the usual
   longevity of Indian politicians.

