
   The government and the Tigers stop pretending they have a ceasefire


   THE six-year-old ceasefire agreement between the Sri Lankan government
   and the Liberation Tigers of Tamil Eelam had long been in tatters, as
   the two sides had already resumed their 25-year-old war. On January
   2nd it was consigned to the dustbin. The government blamed a bomb
   attack on an army bus in Colombo on the Tigers, and said it would
   abrogate the truce, which had "ceased to have any meaning".

   In Oslo, Erik Solheim, the Norwegian government minister who
   negotiated the agreement, was naturally downcast. Civilians, he said,
   would suffer most, as the Norwegian-led ceasefire monitors would have
   to withdraw, leaving them even less protected.

   The government accused the Tigers of using the truce only to arm and
   recruit, and to carry out attacks against government forces and
   civilians, rather than to seek a peaceful solution to the conflict
   between the Sinhalese majority and the Tamil minority over political
   autonomy. Successive Sri Lankan governments have alleged that the
   Norwegian peace brokers had drafted the truce hastily and rammed it
   down the government's throat.

   Both sides kept accusing each other of reneging on it. The government
   charged that the Tigers had violated the truce more than 10,000 times
   since February 2002, carrying out high-profile assassinations, terror
   attacks and abductions of children. But it had itself been waging a
   no-holds-barred military campaign, liberally using aircraft and
   artillery, in which thousands were killed and over 300,000, mostly
   minority Tamils and Muslims, were displaced.

   The Tigers' reclusive and ruthless leader, Velupillai Prabhakaran,
   late last year vowed to continue the armed struggle for an independent
   "Eelam" (homeland) in the island's north and east. The group did not
   react at once to Colombo's unilateral abrogation.

   Mr Solheim feared the end of the truce will bring "a further
   escalation of violence". As it is, some 5,000 people have died in the
   past two years of "ceasefire". But he had not lost all hope.
   Negotiations would resume sooner or later. "Unfortunately," he said,
   "many people will die in the meantime."

