
   Huddled masses, yearning to be free and going to China


   AT FIRST glance, Yunnan would seem the sort of place a pious Muslim
   should avoid. AIDS is rampant in this province in south-western China
   and Beijing's efforts have failed to curb the drugs and prostitution
   that spread the disease. Moreover China has an appalling record of
   suppressing religious freedom, including that of Muslims. In its
   western region of Xinjiang some have taken up arms.

   Yet Muslims from neighbouring Myanmar flock to Yunnan. In cities such
   as Jinghong and Liuku, they sell Burmese gems in shops decorated with
   Arabic calligraphy and pictures of Mecca. A jeweller in Jinghong, who
   has lived here for six years, says that in Myanmar "the Buddhists
   fight us Muslims and don't let us work. The government is very evil.
   Here in China you can work in peace."

   No one knows how many Burmese live in Yunnan. Many enter illegally.
   Official statistics suggest that Muslims make up about 4% of Myanmar's
   population of around 47m, but that is almost certainly an
   underestimate. The ruling junta has a history of discrimination
   against Muslims, particularly the Rohingya ethnic group, more than
   250,000 of whom fled from Arakan province into neighbouring Bangladesh
   in the early 1990s.

   Mosques and schools in Myanmar are shut down arbitrarily. Many Muslims
   find their movements restricted unless they pay hefty bribes; others
   languish in detention after officially instigated clashes with
   Buddhists. It does not help that their political sympathies often lie
   with the democratic opposition, whose leader, Aung San Suu Kyi,
   remains in detention.

   In China, in contrast, the Burmese find that, as long as they make no
   trouble, their faith is immaterial. Compared with other countries of
   refuge, such as Bangladesh, China offers relative stability. Even
   America is not as enticing a prospect. The jeweller frets that, as a
   Muslim, he would risk jail there. Business in China is booming, too;
   jewellers can make as much as 30,000 yuan ($3,900) per month.

   The local population gives them a mixed reception. The
   Hui--ethnic-Chinese Muslims many of whom have family in Myanmar--are
   friendly to their co-religionists. Burmese men here boast of taking
   Hui mistresses and wives. But Yunnan, like much of China, remains
   plagued by vast income inequality; the wealthy jewellers live beside
   subsistence farmers. Some resent the better-educated, wealthier
   Burmese immigrants. Undercurrents of racism do exist, as do reports of
   Burmese trafficking guns and drugs.

   If the resentment flares into violence, many Chinese Hui might side
   with the Burmese. As heroin and AIDS have already shown, Myanmar's
   internal affairs are not just internal. Despite this, China helps prop
   up its repellent regime even as it offers some of its victims
   sanctuary.

