
   Cheerful news from a sad land

   ALONGSIDE the barbed-wire fence of Tuol Sleng, the Khmers Rouges'
   former interrogation and torture centre in Cambodia's capital,
   air-conditioned tourist buses drop off clumps of prosperous-looking
   Europeans and East Asians. They shuffle past the rows of tiny cells,
   some of which have rusting shackles still in place. After a room of
   glass cabinets displaying the skulls of the Khmers Rouges' victims,
   they reach a tacky souvenir shop, selling T-shirts, trinkets and
   plastic flip-flops labelled "Pol Pot sandals", after the regime's late
   tyrant.

                                                                  Reuters

                                  Reuters

                           Tourism can be torture

   In 1975-78, around 10,000 souls suffered unspeakable torments at Tuol
   Sleng. Nowadays, as a "genocide museum", it is a prime attraction in
   the country's booming tourist industry. Until a few years ago, almost
   the only tourists Cambodia got were the fairly small numbers taking
   day-trips to the massive Angkor Wat temple complex in the north. Now
   visitors pour in to the capital, to the seaside resort of
   Sihanoukville and even, now that the roads are being improved, to the
   little-explored countryside. Sihanoukville's airport reopened last
   month to its first scheduled flights since the 1980s and the country's
   moribund railways are to be restored.

   In 1993, as United Nations-sponsored elections signalled the end of
   the civil war that followed the Khmer Rouge regime's collapse,
   Cambodia got only 154,000 foreign visitors. Last year there were 1.7m,
   up 20% on the previous year, and they spent some $1.4 billion, or
   around twice the government's entire tax revenues. A fair chunk of
   this money is trickling down on to the bustling streets of Phnom Penh,
   whose tuk-tuk drivers are doubling their basic fare (for rich-looking
   foreigners) to $2.

   Everything from construction to financial services is booming too.
   Cambodia's clothing factories continue to defy predictions that
   competition from China would kill them. Most important, agriculture,
   which employs two-thirds of the country's workers, is powering ahead,
   encouraged by strong export demand from Cambodia's also-booming big
   neighbour, Vietnam.

   When a bumper harvest boosted Cambodia's growth rate to 13.5% in 2005,
   this was seen as an aberration caused by freak weather rather than any
   lasting improvement in productivity. However, a report from the IMF
   this week shows that farm output has continued rising, and last year's
   overall economic growth was far better than expected, at 10.5%.

   The report forecasts a continuing boom this year, with perhaps 9%
   growth. Better seeds and wider use of fertilisers are helping farmers
   reap more from their rice paddies, says John Nelmes, the IMF's
   representative in Phnom Penh. They are also successfully diversifying
   into other cash crops. "This is the type of growth that brings
   immediate benefit to the poor," he says. Last year the Fund forgave
   the $82m the country owed it, some of which will be redirected towards
   improved irrigation.

   Cambodia is slowly but, it seems, surely dragging itself up from a
   very low base. Perhaps a quarter of its entire population died under
   the Pol Pot regime, including most of its educated people. The
   ineffectiveness of its government is a result of the dire shortage of
   capable people as well as of endemic corruption. Education, health
   services and basic sanitation are still lacking in rural provinces.
   Child labour and child prostitution are widespread. But fast economic
   growth is spreading cheer across the country, from the trendy bistros
   of Phnom Penh's riverfront right out to the impoverished countryside.
   And things could get brighter still: substantial oil and gas reserves
   have recently been found off Cambodia's coasts. The huge potential
   revenues from these could sustain the boom for years to come--so long
   as they are spent wisely.

