
   Scarred by continuing violence, the peace process is in serious
   trouble

   THE arrival of a text message in a political leader's pocket announced
   the latest assassination in the southern Terai plains this week, and
   the news was met with grim exclamations and eye-rolling. Madhav Kumar
   Nepal, leader of a moderate communist party, known as the UML, which
   polled second when Nepal last voted in 1999, does not think anyone is
   going to shoot him. But he will struggle to hold his southern
   constituency if Nepal manages to vote again soon.

   Like most of the country's politicians, Mr Nepal is not yet ready to
   admit that elections scheduled for June are impossible, and will have
   to be delayed until after the monsoon--ie, until October at the
   earliest. But he is willing to discuss this scenario, which most
   people now think is inevitable. The poll, to elect an assembly to
   write a new constitution, is the cornerstone of a peace process
   designed to end a ten-year Maoist insurgency. "Nepal will be entangled
   in complications," he says. "There will be this army, that army,
   creating chaos! A failed government!"

   Many say all this is true already. The southern plains, known as the
   Terai, are home to numerous ethnic-separatist groups with murky links
   to smugglers, bandits and Hindu fundamentalists in India. On March
   21st, supporters of the largest, the Madhesi People's Rights Forum
   (MPRF), killed 29 people, mostly Maoists, near the town of Gaur. The
   victims were raped, burnt, beaten and speared to death. Every day now
   brings news of clashes, bombings, kidnappings and drive-by shootings
   in the Terai.

   A year ago the Maoists were a proscribed "terrorist" organisation, but
   under the peace process they are represented in an interim parliament
   (which their deputies attend with concealed weapons) and consulted on
   government business. Now they say that if the government does not ban
   the MPRF they will wage war to avenge the victims of Gaur.

   Yet one senior official says the government cannot ban the Forum,
   because of the widespread support it enjoys in the Terai. This week,
   he says, the government was aware of several hundred Maoists heading
   into the MPRF's heartland. Besides clashing with Madhesi groups since
   the beginning of the year, the Maoists have repeatedly broken the
   ceasefire in other ways. According to a Western diplomat, around 5,000
   hard-core fighters are hidden outside the United Nations-run camps
   where they are supposed to be confined. Most have enrolled in a new
   goon squad called the Young Communist League. No one believes they
   have surrendered all their weapons. Maoist violence and extortion seem
   as serious as the trouble in Terai. Yet the government and the UN have
   been muted in their criticism.

   At midweek the Maoists were on the brink of joining an interim
   government. The hope is that power will make them act more
   responsibly. But the politicians' hopes of keeping control rest on
   maintaining unity between the seven-party coalition government and the
   Maoists. That will be hard. They blame each other for what is going
   wrong. And to hear the leaders describe one another in private, their
   unity seems as amicable as that of fighting cats trapped in a bag.

