
   The party throws a sop to the workers


   LABOUR conditions in China can be notoriously lousy. Reports abound of
   sweatshops, workers' protests and this year even of officials
   condoning the luring of children into slavery. A new law on employment
   contracts, coming into effect on January 1st, will in theory improve
   workers' lots, but is creating more headaches.

   The law is supposed to provide greater job security. Workers with ten
   years or more of service will have open-ended contracts and companies
   will have to inform unions before sacking anyone. Employers fear the
   law will mean bigger severance payments. The unions will also have the
   power to negotiate collective contracts.

   But the law has many detractors. Some allege it will take China back
   to the "iron rice bowl" era of Maoist days when jobs were for life and
   the economy was crippled by a lack of incentive. Others, conversely,
   argue that it will strengthen state-controlled unions but do little
   for downtrodden workers.

   Both sides agree it has loopholes, which companies have been racing to
   exploit. The Chinese press has cited numerous attempts by enterprises
   to circumvent the law. Huawei, China's best-known maker of
   telecommunications equipment, has attracted special notice. It has
   been accused of asking some 7,000 employees with more than eight years
   of service to resign to compete for new short-term posts. The aim,
   allegedly, was to reclassify them as new employees.

   The new law has been a boon to the All-China Federation of Trade
   Unions (ACFTU), an umbrella for all China's unions that is in effect
   an arm of government. In recent years it has seen its power eroded as
   state-owned industries have collapsed and the private sector has
   flourished, eschewing niceties such as unions and Communist Party
   cells.

   After persuading Huawei, which denied trying to evade the law, to
   revise its plans, the ACFTU this week issued a stern warning to other
   companies not to try anything similar. It said a "small number" were
   laying off large numbers of workers in advance of the new law. This,
   it said, was threatening the success of efforts to build a "socialist
   harmonious society" and should be "resolutely stopped".

   But for all the ACFTU's propaganda, few expect it to emerge as a
   strident new champion of workers' rights. Independent trade unions
   will remain in effect illegal. China has no plans to reintroduce the
   right to strike, which it abolished in 1982 as it began to fret about
   the example set by the Solidarity trade-union movement in Poland. The
   role of the ACFTU, in the government's eyes, is to prevent worker
   unrest.

   One of the main aims of the new law is to counter the widespread
   complaints in China that the country has been over-zealous in its
   embrace of capitalism. These complaints became particularly shrill in
   June, after reports emerged that local officials in the northern
   province of Shanxi had allowed rural brick kilns to lure hundreds of
   people, including children, to work in slave-like conditions. The new
   law had been publicly debated long before the scandal surfaced. But
   its critics say the government rushed to push it through the
   rubber-stamp legislature in June in order to assuage public anger over
   the kilns.

   One of the law's most outspoken critics is Dong Baohua of the East
   China University of Political Science and Law, who helped draft
   China's first labour law in 1994. Among Mr Dong's complaints is that
   the new law does nothing to improve the lot of tens of millions of
   migrant workers from the countryside. They make up most of the
   unskilled labour in urban areas and are the most frequent victims of
   poor labour conditions. China's official trade unions have yet to
   build a network among such workers. Nor will the law help people such
   as Shanxi's slaves, who suffer not from a lack of legal protection but
   from poor enforcement. Mr Dong also says the new law will not cut the
   number of labour disputes, which have become increasingly common in
   recent years (see chart).

   For all the ACFTU's fulminations, critics say many companies will
   continue efforts to evade the law or else simply ignore it. But in an
   interview published by one of China's biggest-circulation newspapers,
   Southern Weekend, Mr Dong argued that China could also end up like
   France, with its economy numbed by costly employment benefits and
   strikes triggered by any effort to reform them. That, he said, would
   be the "most terrifying" outcome for China. The party would agree.

