
   Pakistan's role in developing and disseminating nuclear-weapons
   technology around the world has long been known to America, a new book
   contends 

     The Nuclear Jihadist: The True Story of the Man Who Sold the World's
               Most Dangerous Secrets...and How We Could Have Stopped Him
                                  By Douglas Frantz and Catherine Collins
                                                         [0446199575.jpg]
                                                   Twelve; 432 pages; $25
                                                                Buy it at
                                                            [3]Amazon.com
                                                          [4]Amazon.co.uk

                                                                  Reuters

                                  Reuters


   DURING a visit last year to Washington, DC, to try to convince George
   Bush's administration that she was the answer to Pakistan's problems,
   Benazir Bhutto promised to hand over Abdul Qadeer Khan, the former
   head of her nation's atomic bomb programme, who has been living under
   house arrest in Islamabad since 2004. Under Miss Bhutto's rule, Mr
   Khan would be made available for questioning--not directly by the
   Americans, but by the next best thing, the International Atomic Energy
   Agency in Vienna.

   Miss Bhutto is now dead, and it is unlikely that any other Pakistani
   leader in the near future will allow the world to know the full
   details of how a Pakistani scientist came to sell nuclear secrets to
   Iran, Libya and North Korea. The reaction at home to Miss Bhutto's
   proposal was outrage. Mr Khan, best known as A.Q. Khan, may officially
   be in disgrace and forced to live without access to radio, television
   or the internet, but for many Pakistanis he remains a national hero.
   When he was hospitalised last year the prime minister sent flowers.

   "The Nuclear Jihadist" exposes in detail how Mr Khan, an affable,
   mediocre metallurgist inspired by the dream of an Islamic bomb, stole
   nuclear technology from the Dutch laboratory in which he was working
   in the mid-1970s, moved back to Pakistan to build a giant enrichment
   complex to make the bomb at Kahuta in Punjab province, and then
   created a nuclear Wal-Mart to sell the parts to others. The authors
   describe his work as the linchpin of the "second nuclear age".

   Pakistan's progress towards becoming a nuclear power began with Miss
   Bhutto's father, Zulfikar Ali Bhutto, who promised, "If India builds
   the bomb, we will eat grass or leaves, even go hungry, but we will get
   one of our own." As for Miss Bhutto, she told the Americans when she
   was prime minister in the late 1980s that she did not know the details
   of the nuclear device her scientists were developing. If she was being
   truthful, the authors suggest she was close to negligent. She assured
   George Bush senior that she would keep Pakistan from enriching uranium
   to weapons-grade level, and was promptly sold 60 F-16 fighter jets.
   America had sold Pakistan 40 F-16s during the Reagan presidency, when
   it already knew about the nuclear programme.

   The book's most revealing passages are about America's role in the
   affair. The authors argue that successive American administrations
   knew a lot about Mr Khan's activities, but for larger strategic
   foreign-policy reasons, chose to do nothing about them. Mr Khan was
   able to flout international rules on nuclear non-proliferation because
   American policymakers thought that securing Pakistan's assistance in
   defeating the Soviet Union in Afghanistan--and, more recently,
   President Pervez Musharraf's help in fighting terrorism--were more
   important than limiting the spread of nuclear bombs.

   The story of Richard Barlow, a CIA agent who once worked in its
   directorate of intelligence on proliferation, sums up the American
   attitude. Mr Barlow had protested that intelligence was being
   manipulated by the Pentagon to suit the policy adopted by President
   Bush senior's administration of turning a blind eye to Pakistan's
   nuclear development. He lost his job. The authors find Mr Barlow at
   the end of the book denied his state pension, living with two dogs in
   a motor home.

   The one successful recent effort to reverse the spread of nuclear
   technology involves Libya. After September 11th 2001, Libya's leader,
   Muammar Qaddafi, agreed to give up his nuclear ambitions in return for
   better access to western investment and trade. But the authors show
   that even in this instance American and British intelligence agents
   believe enough critical technology remains hidden to allow Libya one
   day to rekindle its programme.

   Douglas Frantz, an investigative journalist and former managing editor
   of the Los Angeles Times, and his wife, Catherine Collins, also a
   journalist, know how to weave complicated material into a persuasive
   narrative. Mr Musharraf has insisted all along that Mr Khan, the
   salesman, was a lone wolf who operated under the radar, and that his
   network has been shut down. The authors argue that this claim is
   far-fetched: there is still plenty of nuclear know-how in the wrong
   hands.
   The Nuclear Jihadist: The True Story of the Man Who Sold the World's
   Most Dangerous Secrets...and How We Could Have Stopped Him.
   By Douglas Frantz and Catherine Collins.
   Twelve; 432 pages; $25 

