
                                                                       AP

                                     AP

   South Korea's Roh Moo-hyun plays down expectations for an historic
   summit

   GLIDING across the border in a 30-limousine convoy, Roh Moo-hyun,
   South Korea's president, will on October 2nd visit Pyongyang and meet
   North Korea's capo, Kim Jong Il, for three days of talks. It is only
   the second summit between the two sides since their estrangement in a
   civil war over half a century ago.

   The first, seven years ago, was between Mr Kim and Mr Roh's
   predecessor, Kim Dae-jung, who launched a "sunshine policy" towards
   the North. The meeting generated euphoria among South Koreans and won
   their president a Nobel peace prize, but produced little else. Kim
   Jong Il never came to Seoul, as he promised he would. Relations
   deteriorated between North Korea and the United States, South Korea's
   protector. And last year the North tested a nuclear bomb, to the
   region's dismay. As for the summit itself, it later transpired it was
   bought with cash passed under the table to the Dear Leader.

   Mr Roh knows things have changed. The national mood towards
   reconciliation is subdued, even sceptical. Lacking Kim Dae-jung's
   charisma, his own political authority is at rock-bottom, after an
   ineffective presidency; he stands down at the end of the year. The
   only constant is that the summit's agenda is whatever Mr Kim decides
   it will be, and that he is not letting on: so, as one of Mr Roh's
   advisers delicately puts it, the summit is "open-ended".

   While dampening expectations, Mr Roh clearly hopes for a breakthrough
   in one or more of three areas: in reducing tensions and furthering
   peace on the Korean peninsula; deeper economic co-operation with the
   benighted North; and reconciliation of the many thorny issues--such as
   the tens of thousands of families separated since the Korean war--that
   might bring the distant goal of unification a tad closer. Above
   anything, Mr Roh appears to want to come home waving a scrap of paper
   with "peace" written on it.

   Hawks, particularly in America, say that Mr Roh's ambitions risk
   running ahead of the "six-party" process in which America, China,
   Japan, Russia and South Korea are hoping to get North Korea to abandon
   its nuclear ambitions. Too much offered by the South might lead the
   North to hope for aid without scrapping its nuclear programmes. It is
   not certain that Mr Roh will even bring up the nuclear issue with Mr
   Kim. Meanwhile, say some of Mr Roh's critics, peace with the North is
   a matter for all the former combatants of the Korean war, China and
   America included.

   Mr Roh's men deny there is any risk. The president's hopes for
   economic co-operation and reconciliation are being entertained only
   because of progress on denuclearisation, they say; in July, North
   Korea closed its Soviet-era reactor at Yongbyon and has since promised
   to declare and disable all its programmes by the end of the year. They
   argue that it will do the liberal Mr Roh no favours if he returns with
   a deal that is unacceptable to his successor as president (the clear
   favourite is Lee Myung-bak, whose right-wing Grand National Party has
   a harder line towards North Korea). As for economic co-operation, says
   a close adviser, it has been far too one-sided to date, with North
   Korea simply taking South Korean money, fuel-oil and rice, much of
   which finds its way to the armed forces. From now on, the South
   expects much more--starting with the chance to invest in the North's
   rich mineral resources and cheap labour. To press home the point,
   two-dozen business executives will accompany Mr Roh.

   Some expect the North to go surprisingly far. Chung-in Moon of Yonsei
   University, an architect of the "sunshine policy", argues that
   decrepit North Korea is on the brink of opening up just as China did
   three decades ago, because Kim Jong Il recognises that his legitimacy
   now rests on future prosperity.

   But outside help is hard to imagine without progress on the nuclear
   issue. The United States classes North Korea as an enemy; it also
   brands the country as a state sponsor of terrorism. Both hobble North
   Korea's ability to trade. America offers to lift these curses in
   return for a real disablement of North Korea's nuclear capabilities.

   On September 27th the six-party talks reconvened in Beijing. Their
   outlook was clouded by a mysterious recent Israeli air strike at a
   Syrian target that some claimed was a North Korea-assisted nuclear
   facility. North Korea vigorously denies this and American diplomats
   say they have seen no intelligence confirming it. Negotiators, wanting
   nothing to distract North Korea from a timetable for denuclearisation,
   are inclined to gloss over the matter. For the timetable, as it is,
   involves some quite devilish details.

