
                                                                  Eyevine

                                  Eyevine

   All the misery of Maoism with none of the redeeming features


   THE place often seems like a black box from which the occasional
   horror (like a nuclear bomb) emerges without warning or welcome. North
   Korea certainly deserves its nickname, the hermit kingdom. Visitors
   are tightly controlled and only a trickle of Westerners admitted. Yet
   even North Korea needs dollars, and tries to get them by attracting
   Chinese tourists, who go for the gambling, and the bizarre allure of a
   bygone era of fanaticism and privation that China itself once endured.
   Joining a group of 60 visitors, this is what you find.

   The North Koreans can put on a good show. In April and May, no fewer
   than 100,000 performers went through a series of synchronised
   gymnastic displays at the May 1st Stadium in Pyongyang, the capital.
   Even a few hundred Western tourists got a peek (many from the
   arch-enemy, America, whose tourists are normally kept at bay). To
   Chinese visitors, the show, known as Arirang, was reminiscent of
   similar extravaganzas in Beijing during the days of Mao Zedong.
   "Nowadays I doubt whether we could do it," says one, wistfully. Next
   year's Olympic Games in Beijing, he suggests, might prove an
   exception.

   In the late 1990s, the North Koreans allowed investors from Hong Kong
   and Macau to set up casinos in their closed world. One was in
   Rajin-Sonbong, a failed investment zone close to the Chinese border;
   another lurked in the basement of an isolated hotel for foreigners in
   Pyongyang. North Korea correctly reckoned that, since gambling is
   banned in China, these would be a big attraction (gambling is also
   banned in North Korea for ordinary citizens, but the government
   allowed Chinese to staff the casinos).

   As China saw it, the casinos proved rather too popular, drawing huge
   numbers of corrupt officials. Two years ago, China cracked down on
   cross-border gambling--appealing to neighbouring countries to close
   down casinos, banning travel agents from offering gambling tours,
   restricting foreign visits by officials--after one official allegedly
   embezzled hundreds of thousands of dollars of government funds and
   gambled the money away at the casino in Rajin-Sonbong. This has now
   been closed. The one in Pyongyang is still open, but is beyond the
   range of weekend holiday-makers. These days you find few gamblers
   there, mostly Chinese tourists betting a few tens of dollars to help
   relieve the tedium of endless mind-numbing tours of political
   monuments.

   Neither China nor North Korea publishes regular figures for tourism in
   each other's country but the crackdown seems to have taken its toll.
   One Chinese newspaper said there had been 20,000 job losses in
   Dandong, a border town through which Chinese tourists usually pass on
   their way to North Korea by train. The number of Chinese visitors to
   Dandong has fallen to a quarter of what it was in the peak years. Last
   August many travel agencies said North Korea had stopped accepting
   Chinese visitors. It is not clear why. Some cited floods. One official
   newspaper said it was because North Korea had reduced its annual quota
   for Chinese tourists. It is likely that it was also piqued by China's
   unusually tart response to its supposed ally's missile and nuclear
   tests. Early this year, restrictions appeared to ease again.

   What remains is a niche market for the curious and sated. For all
   their professed ideological similarities, North Korea and China are
   worlds apart. Affluent urban Chinese who have travelled to other parts
   of Asia now visit North Korea for its rarity value, and for a taste of
   what they themselves have escaped from. One member of your
   correspondent's group was the son of a Korean war veteran. He and
   other Chinese visitors were disappointed to find little public
   acknowledgement of China's role in the Korean war of 1950-53, when
   hundreds of thousands of Chinese died fighting the Americans.

   Older Chinese visitors find striking comparisons with their own
   country, 30 or more years ago. The public worship of North Korea's
   leader, Kim Jong Il, and of his late father, Kim Il Sung, is similar
   to the cult of Mao. The state ideology of juche (self-reliance) has
   much in common with Mao's isolationism. Chinese tourists are given
   warning, before leaving, to avoid commenting on North Korean politics
   and to be careful where they point their cameras. China was once as
   prickly.

   North Korea is almost as wary of Chinese visitors as it is of
   Westerners. Like Westerners, Chinese are assigned guides whose job is
   to prevent spontaneous contact with locals. Some guides express
   disdain for Chinese socialism. "China is so dirty now and so
   expensive, and takes no stance whatsoever against the American
   imperialists", says one (with its industry barely operating, North
   Korea's air does seem refreshingly unpolluted to Chinese visitors).

   The kind of tourism North Korea prefers is the carefully controlled
   tours by South Koreans to Mount Kumgang, a scenic resort on the
   northern side of their common border. There, they have virtually no
   contact with locals (South Korean tourists are rarely welcome in
   Pyongyang). On May 17th, North and South Korea opened the first rail
   links across the border since the Korean war. It was largely a
   symbolic act. Maybe one day such links will make it easier to travel
   to Mount Kumgang and to Kaesong, a South Korean investment zone in the
   north. But there is no sign North Korea plans to let South Koreans
   travel freely. Regular train services are still a distant prospect.

   As mobile-phone-loving Chinese tourists frequently complain, North
   Korea does not allow visitors to bring their phones into the
   country--so fearful is it of unmonitored information conduits to the
   outside world. There is no internet access even in expensive hotels.
   North Koreans authorised to speak to visitors appear to be oblivious
   of their guests' annoyance at such privations. They boast that North
   Korea's economy once outperformed China's, particularly in the 1960s
   when China was gripped by famine. One Chinese visitor says her brother
   fled to North Korea then. The North Koreans do not allow her to try to
   contact him.

   A Chinese travel agent says North Korea's poverty is part of its
   off-beat appeal. If North Korea were to become richer, she says, it
   would lose its competitive tourism advantage. Not that it is a huge
   draw, even when it does welcome tourists. The Arirang performance,
   originally due to last for a month, ended several days early because
   of insufficient paying visitors.

