
   Tourists bring back tales of life in Kim Jong Il's grim theme park

                                                                   Corbis

                                   Corbis

                  All of Kim's horses and all of Kim's men


   GLOBAL capitalism has worked many wonders, but where in the free world
   can one see 10,000 children dancing in synchronisation, dressed as
   eggs? Such weirdness makes North Korea, a basket-case state, a must
   for a certain sort of backpacker. Tourist visas have been available
   for years; there is even a Lonely Planet chapter on the country. Some
   2,000 Westerners will visit in 2007--a tiny number, but about four
   times the total in 2002.

   Tours are tightly marshalled so that only highlights such as the "Mass
   Games" performance, home of the dancing eggs, are widely reported.
   Visitors must normally provide references proving that they are not
   journalists. But details are seeping out: blogs, Facebook groups and
   customisable Google Earth maps have made reporters of everyone and
   offer channels for unauthorised news from the closed country.

   Many travellers harp on the propaganda: blocks of flats are topped
   with neon exhortations to "turn a corner in the economy" and suchlike,
   and murals depict hearty workers striding forward, perhaps trampling a
   star-spangled banner or two as they go. At Pyongyang's "Kaeson Youth
   Funfair"--home of the world's most genuinely frightening
   rollercoaster--the crossbow stall's painted targets are of big-nosed
   American soldiers and glowering Japanese. It seems that the tourist
   board realises the ironic appeal of such things: painted replicas of
   some of the most over-the-top bits of propaganda are for sale, and a
   post office does a roaring trade in stamps depicting mighty fists
   crushing Western imperialist aggressors. (Oddly, there is also a
   Princess Diana commemoration set.)

   The patriotic propaganda mainly seems to be in earnest, however,
   especially where the country's leaders are concerned. Portraits of Kim
   Il Sung, the founder of North Korea, and Kim Jong Il, his son and the
   current leader, still beam down from every street corner. One must not
   fold one's Pyongyang Times if a Kim is on the front page, as is
   invariably the case. Even at the "flower show", a regular stop for
   tourists, the entire plant nursery is dedicated to Kimjongilia and
   Kimilsungia, the leaders' respective blooms.

   Every North Korean citizen sports a plastic lapel badge bearing the
   face of one or other of the Kims. A few years ago it was reported that
   production of Kim Jong Il badges was to cease, and factories were to
   churn out only the Kim Il Sung variety. Now hardly anyone wears a Kim
   junior badge. Similarly, paintings of Kim senior outnumber those of
   his son by two to one, and there are no statues of the latter. Kim the
   younger is instead often depicted by the blood-red Kimjongilia
   begonia. The official explanation is that he is simply a modest sort
   of chap. His unfortunate looks may have something to do with it
   (though many North Korean men diligently copy his exotic bouffant
   hairstyle). Or perhaps he is preparing the ground for a successor?

   Most Westerners are put up in a hotel on a river island, an Alcatraz
   of fun that they may not leave unescorted. To keep curiosity at bay
   there is a swimming-pool, a bowling-alley, a putting-green and two
   saunas (one hot; one seedy). But the hotel also provides a
   vantage-point: photos from the top-floor revolving restaurant give a
   good picture of the bleakness of Pyongyang. Most striking is the
   architectural uniformity. American bombs pulverised the city during
   the Korean War, so not much is more than 50 years old--and hardly
   anything has been built since the early 1990s, so stagnant is the
   economy.

   The rooftop view also provides some encouragement. Dotted about the
   city are several blue-roofed halls, a bit like aircraft hangars.
   Inside, away from the eyes of tourists, are experimental free-trade
   areas, where citizens can buy and sell goods for cash, something
   unheard of until recently. The halls are strictly off-limits for tour
   groups but are humming with locals. Though official tours take in
   monuments, museums and mass dances, it may be that these little hives
   of activity are the most exciting parts of present-day North Korea.

