
   Mixed blessings for China


   POLITICAL developments in Taiwan rarely bring cheer for China. But the
   ruling party's surprising choice for its candidate to fight next
   year's presidential elections will at least provide a little comfort
   to the government in Beijing. It would be happier still if he were to
   lose.

   Frank Hsieh, a former prime minister who wants better relations with
   China, won the nomination after a decisive victory in a ballot on May
   6th among members of the ruling Democratic Progressive Party (DPP). He
   got 45% of the vote, compared with 33% for his main rival, the
   incumbent prime minister, Su Tseng-chang. This was a blow to President
   Chen Shui-bian, who favoured Mr Su and a tougher stance towards China.

   Just as remarkably, given bitter in-fighting within the DPP, Mr Su and
   the two other candidates withdrew gracefully from the race. According
   to party rules, they could have fought a further round. Mr Hsieh's
   nomination will be formally confirmed at the DPP's annual congress on
   June 30th.

   Mr Hsieh has a reputation as a scrapper, having survived numerous
   crises and failures. These include a defeat as a vice-presidential
   candidate in 1996 and controversy about alleged connections with a
   cult led by a man claiming to have supernatural powers who has been
   convicted of fraud. Only five months ago, Mr Hsieh lost a race for the
   mayorship of Taipei. He hopes his political fortunes will mimic those
   of President Chen, who won the presidency in 2000 after losing a bid
   for re-election as mayor of Taipei in 1998. In the presidential
   election next March, Mr Hsieh's chief opponent will be the man who
   defeated Mr Chen in 1998, Ma Ying-jeou, the charismatic nominee of the
   main opposition party, the Kuomintang (KMT).

   Mr Hsieh owes his victory partly to the frustration of DPP members
   with Mr Chen's lacklustre performance. But he faces a tough battle
   against Mr Ma. A poll released this week by the China Times, a pro-KMT
   newspaper, put Mr Ma nine points ahead of Mr Hsieh, although he led by
   20 points before the primary.

   Criminal investigations might yet play a role in the contest. Mr Ma is
   on trial for allegedly embezzling a mayoral special allowance and has
   vowed to remain in the race even if found guilty. There is speculation
   that Mr Hsieh, too, might be indicted on corruption charges in a case
   dating back to his tenure as mayor of the island's second-largest
   city, Kaohsiung, from 1998 to 2005. Should he be charged, the DPP
   would probably put pressure on him to withdraw.

   Like President Chen, Mr Hsieh is a former lawyer who in the past
   defended dissidents under the authoritarian rule of the KMT. Unlike Mr
   Chen, who takes an uncompromising stance towards China, Mr Hsieh has
   called for "coexistence and reconciliation", though he has also called
   for constitutional revisions aimed at making Taiwan a "normal
   country"--a goal that has caused considerable anxiety in both Beijing
   and Washington, DC.

   China would prefer a victory for Mr Ma, who has pushed for better ties
   with China, particularly economic ones. He has not ruled out
   unification, though he says China must become a democracy first. The
   coming months are likely to be turbulent ones in Taiwanese politics,
   something China never likes.

