
                                                            Claudio Munoz

                               Claudio Munoz

   Despite worries about the damage corruption does to the Communist
   Party's reputation, efforts to stamp it out remain half-hearted


   CORRUPTION, Chinese officials often fret out loud, could destroy the
   Communist Party--such is the popular anger it provokes and so at odds
   is it with the ideals the party espouses. Yet frequent crackdowns and
   the occasional toppling of sleazy officials appear to have little
   impact. Nor, many fear, will a new anti-corruption agency, due to be
   set up this year. As they jockey for position before a crucial party
   gathering in the autumn, China's leaders are in no mood for serious
   reform.

   In Shanghai and Beijing, where big corruption scandals involving top
   officials have been exposed in recent months, new cases of alleged
   high-level wrongdoing are still coming to light. In Beijing the
   state-owned media reported last week that Zhou Liangluo, the chief of
   Haidian district, home to many of the city's universities and
   high-tech companies, had been detained for allegedly engaging in shady
   property deals. In Shanghai it emerged earlier this month that Yin
   Guoyuan, a former deputy head of the housing bureau, was being
   investigated for similar reasons.

   Despite the anxious rhetoric, the party is not on the brink of
   collapse. But the scandals of the past few months have stoked debate
   within its ranks and more widely in China about the need for better
   ways of dealing with corruption. Officials have been studying
   anti-corruption agencies elsewhere, notably in Hong Kong and
   Singapore, which rate highly in regional league tables of clean
   government. Singapore's authoritarian tendencies and Hong Kong's lack
   of democracy make them, for some Chinese officials, especially
   appealing models.

   In the build-up to a five-yearly party congress due later this year,
   Chinese leaders have been stressing the need to build a "harmonious
   society". Making officials more honest is portrayed as vital to this
   endeavour. The congress will be the first presided over by Hu Jintao,
   state president as well as head of the party, as China's paramount
   leader. It will be an important opportunity for him to promote his
   supporters and show what he has achieved in five years in power. But
   when it comes to tackling corruption, Mr Hu is hesitant about changing
   the system.

   Few are impressed by plans revealed in February to set up a Corruption
   Prevention Bureau. Its remit remains unclear, but Ren Jianming of
   Tsinghua University in Beijing believes it will not have investigative
   powers. It will probably report to the Ministry of Supervision,
   responsible for standards in the bureaucracy, or directly to the State
   Council, China's cabinet. But Mr Ren says the party's own
   anti-corruption agency, the Central Disciplinary Inspection Commission
   (CDIC), will still decide which top officials should be investigated
   and punished.

   Officials say that the new bureau will help China fulfil its
   obligations under the United Nations' 2003 convention against
   corruption, which requires signatories to have a corruption-prevention
   agency. The convention is vague about what this body should do, but
   says it should be able to operate "free from any undue influence".
   Chinese officials have not spelled out how this will be attempted.

   In the past five years, Mr Hu has done little to make the CDIC less
   vulnerable to the whims of party leaders. The CDIC's action last
   September against Shanghai's Communist Party chief, Chen Liangyu, led
   to his arrest, dismissal and suspension from the Politburo for alleged
   misuse of pension funds. But it raised suspicions that Mr Hu was using
   the commission to settle scores with a rival party faction. Mr Chen
   was replaced last month as Shanghai's party chief by Xi Jinping, who
   is close to Mr Hu. Mr Xi, like a sprinkling of other senior Chinese
   officials, is the offspring of one of communist China's founding
   fathers. Such "princelings" are on the rise.

   Some of China's bolder newspapers have hinted that Mr Hu could be
   doing more to clean things up. They have noted that Vietnam--hardly a
   model of clean government--last month issued a decree requiring
   legislators and senior officials to declare their assets. China
   imposes no such burden on legislators; officials are subject only to
   patchily and secretively enforced requirements to report their
   incomes. Officials have brushed aside proposals by some members of
   China's parliament for a law aimed at ensuring better compliance.
   Frustration with official corruption is one reason why most of China's
   high earners ignored a new rule requiring them to fill out personal
   income-tax returns by the beginning of this month.

   Despite an occasional combative streak, the media hardly ever report
   corruption cases without official approval. It was only this month
   that they reported the arrest by investigators last August of Zhang
   Weihua, the deputy head of a state-run lottery intended to raise money
   for sports, including for facilities for next year's Olympic Games in
   Beijing. An audit in 2005 found that the lottery had diverted 558m
   yuan ($72m) into subsidiaries, which paid some of the money as bonuses
   to staff.

   Mr Hu has tweaked the system a bit. In recent months, during a shuffle
   of provincial leadership posts, he managed to ensure that
   discipline-inspection commissions in the provinces are led by CDIC
   officials from Beijing, or by anti-corruption officials from other
   provinces. In the past these roles have usually been filled by
   placemen of the provincial party chiefs, rendering them useless in
   investigating corruption cases involving the top echelons of the
   party. Even so, the impact of the reform may be limited. According to
   the party charter, provincial commissions must still inform local
   party leaders if they plan to investigate them for corruption.

   The prime minister, Wen Jiabao, has been forthright, at least in
   admitting the extent of the problem. At a news conference last month,
   he said that corruption had been getting "more and more serious", a
   departure from the party's usual line that its clean-up is having some
   success. Mr Wen must have bitten his tongue. In the official
   transcript published by the Chinese press, his remarks were more
   cautious: corruption was only "quite serious" in some places and
   departments. The media did report his unoriginal but far-reaching
   suggestion that one remedy would be more political reform. But there
   is little sign that Chinese leaders are eager to pursue that.

