
   A new government in the Marshall Islands may spell trouble for America
   
   FIFTY years have passed since America ended nuclear testing in the
   Marshall Islands. But its 52,500 people are still wrestling with the
   legacy. On January 7th they ditched the pro-American administration
   led by Kessai Note and elected instead a government backed by
   disgruntled chiefs and senators from the nuclear-affected atolls. The
   new leaders are unhappy with their nation's "Compact of Free
   Association" (CFA) with the United States. They want to press the
   claims of nuclear victims on the islands of Bikini, Rongelap, Utrik
   and Enewetak. They are also considering opening diplomatic relations
   with China.

   America has reason to worry. It retains important strategic interests
   on Kwajalein, the country's largest atoll. Test missiles fired from
   California as part of the "Star Wars II" missile-defence programme
   regularly plunge spectacularly onto the lagoon floor, to be retrieved
   for scientific analysis. When the CFA was renegotiated in 2003,
   America insisted on a separate agreement giving it continued access to
   its $4 billion missile-defence test site on Kwajalein until at least
   2066. For this, it agreed to pay $15m a year, rising to $18m after
   2014. It rejected pleas from local landowners for direct negotiations,
   insisting on talks only with Mr Note's government. The new compact is
   worth about $3.5 billion over its 20 years, and gives Marshall
   Islanders rights to work and live in America.

   The Kwajalein chiefs responded by forming their own political party,
   the Aelon Kein Ad (AKA), which this week defeated Mr Note's party.
   After a chaotic election, which the AKA claims was marked by severe
   irregularities, it gained 18 seats in the 33-member Nitijela
   (parliament), just enough to secure the presidency.

   The new president, Litokwa Tomeing, has said his country's links with
   Taiwan are not paying off and that he wants to switch diplomatic
   recognition to China. If he does--and Taiwan is lobbying hard and
   expensively to dissuade him--that may further unsettle America. When
   Kiribati, another country of sun-baked atolls and lagoons just to the
   south, had links with Beijing, it allowed the Chinese to build a
   satellite-tracking station on the island of Tarawa. When it switched
   to Taipei in 2003, the station was hastily removed, to American
   relief. America would be unlikely to tolerate a similar facility in a
   Chinese-allied Marshall Islands.

   America paid $270m in compensation to nuclear victims under the first
   phase of the CFA (1986-2001), insisting that was a full and final
   arrangement. The new government claims this was far too little to
   compensate for the ill-health, birth defects and deaths suffered, or
   to cover the costs of cleaning up the damaged islands. The 67 tests
   conducted in the northern Marshalls between 1946 and 1958 released
   radioactive iodine said to be 150 times worse than the contamination
   from the nuclear disaster at Chernobyl in 1986. The new foreign
   minister claims that rising temperatures have caused irradiated
   bunkers once thought safe to leak, and that impoverished islanders are
   exporting toxic metals from their poisoned atolls.

   The AKA-dominated government's position is nevertheless precarious.
   Unless it can force big concessions from the Americans, several
   wavering senators could well switch sides. But America may find it in
   its interests to show some flexibility. It might be much costlier to
   stand firm than to bend a little to the prevailing political winds.

