
   A by-election about the territory's future

                                                                  Reuters
                                                                  Reuters

                                            Is Anson fairest of them all?


   IT MAY be only a by-election, but it is being portrayed as a vote on
   Hong Kong's future. It is certainly the biggest celebrity contest in
   the territory's voting history. On one side is Anson Chan, a former
   head of the civil service who wants full democracy at the next
   opportunity. On the other, Regina Ip, a former security minister who
   is not so sure. Neither are many voters.

   Mrs Chan's decision in September to enter the December 2nd contest has
   upset the government in Beijing. Since her retirement in 2001, Mrs
   Chan has gradually emerged as a champion of democracy in Hong Kong. In
   a contest organised in September by pro-democratic parties to choose a
   candidate for the by-election, Mrs Chan (who has no party ties) won
   hands down. Opinion polls at first put her streets ahead of Mrs Ip,
   who is backed by parties close to the mainland government.

   In the past few weeks the two ex-bureaucrats have been trying to
   reinvent themselves as politicians. Mrs Ip, 57, spent a night in a
   cramped apartment to experience the sufferings of residents caused by
   a nearby train line. Mrs Chan, a patrician 67-year-old, has been
   visiting the poor and standing on street corners handing out leaflets.
   Facing the occasional heckler, she says, has been a "humbling
   experience".

   Mrs Chan should not have to try this hard. The by-election is in Hong
   Kong Island, a constituency where around 60% of voters normally
   support democrats. In 2003 Mrs Ip became a target of the democrats'
   wrath for her brusque attempts as Hong Kong's security chief to
   promote an anti-subversion bill that they said would restrict civil
   liberties. Hong Kong is constitutionally required to pass such
   legislation, but huge protests and the withdrawal of support by some
   pro-government legislators forced the government to shelve the idea.
   Amid the furore, Mrs Ip resigned.

   But much has changed in the past four years. In 2005, at China's quiet
   urging, the then widely disliked chief executive, Tung Chee-hwa,
   stepped down. Hong Kong's economy has revived. Mrs Ip has apologised
   for her handling of the bill (though she still defends its contents).
   She returned to Hong Kong this year after earning a master's degree at
   Stanford University. Her time abroad taught her that "it's much better
   for government if you have a mandate from the people", she says. Mrs
   Ip's election platform calls for the chief executive and the
   legislative council (LegCo) to be elected by universal suffrage in
   2012 (though she would not object to delaying this to 2016 for LegCo
   and 2017 for the chief executive). Despite widespread demands earlier
   this decade for quicker reform, many voters now appear content with
   such a timetable.

   As Mrs Ip's support among pro-Beijing groups suggests, there is a
   catch. Nominees for the post of chief executive would need the support
   of at least 10% of each of four groups within a 1,800-strong
   nominating committee. One of these groups would represent the
   industrial, commercial and financial sector. Critics say it would be
   extremely difficult to persuade even a tenth of them to support a
   candidate disliked by Beijing, given their extensive business links
   with the mainland. Mrs Chan wants to set the threshold at 10% of the
   entire nominating committee. Mrs Ip's proposal, she says, is a "huge
   step backwards".

   Democrats concede that arguments over such fine detail do not excite
   voters. They fret that in elections to district councils on November
   18th they will lose some of the gains they made in 2003 after the
   uproar over the subversion bill. Although Mrs Chan is still the
   frontrunner in the December 2nd ballot, they worry that her margin may
   be slim. And even if Mrs Ip loses, she is most likely to win in LegCo
   elections next year that allow runners-up to get seats. All good
   training, perhaps, for an eventual bid to be chief executive.

