
   As foreign troops become more efficient, government is still the
   problem

                                                                      Pfc

                                    Pfc


   THEY came on foot, by lorry and by helicopter to the great tents at
   the junction of two dry river beds at Charbaran. Bearded men whirled
   rapturously to the sound of a drumbeat, kicking up a cloud of fine
   dust over the American soldiers around them.

   This shura, or tribal council, was the culmination of Operation Attal,
   designed to clear the Taliban from three districts in Paktika, a
   troubled province bordering Pakistan. Three months earlier Charbaran's
   district centre--a government office-cum-police station--had been
   torched by the Taliban and the area was said to be a training ground
   for the insurgents. Now it has been rebuilt with stout sandbagged
   fortifications and artillery for protection.

   In a bloody year that has seen more Western soldiers killed than at
   any time since they toppled the Taliban in 2001, Operation Attal,
   which lasted three weeks, was uneventful. Hardly a shot was fired as
   the Taliban melted away before thousands of Afghan and American
   soldiers. But for the Americans success these days is measured less by
   the number of Taliban killed, and more by the number of Afghans who
   overcome their loyalty to the Taliban, or fear of them, to attend such
   a meeting. The Americans had been hoping for 200 guests; about 1,500
   people came. It was billed as an Afghan reconciliation between local
   tribes and the central government. The choreography, however, was all
   American: American soldiers rebuilt the district centre, erected the
   tents, bulldozed new roads, brought the dignitaries by helicopter and
   even supplied a portrait of President Hamid Karzai.

   One elder complained about the broken promises of development, and
   about the Americans surrounding them with armoured Humvees and roaring
   jets. He also wanted to get the tribe's confiscated weapons back. The
   36-year-old governor, Akram Khapalwak, was having none of it. He
   demanded to know why the area's Kharoti tribe had allowed the
   destruction of the district centre and the theft of government
   vehicles. What was the point in building schools when teachers were
   being intimidated? He said $1m had been given to the Kharoti for
   schools, clinics and water projects, but there was little to show for
   it. "You thieves," said the governor.

   The recriminations over, lunch was served. The elders later agreed to
   provide 30 of their sons for the Afghan police force: a hopeful sign
   that the tribesmen were coming over to the government's side.

   Operation Attal was remarkable for another reason. It was the first
   big operation planned and executed by the Afghan National Army, with
   more than 5,000 Afghan soldiers supported by about 400 Americans from
   the 1-503rd airborne infantry regiment. In the operations centre near
   Gardez, American officers sat in the second row, behind Afghan staff
   officers.

   It was Afghan forces who searched homes while the Americans covered
   their backs. And behind the front-line troops followed lorry-loads of
   humanitarian supplies. The Americans delivered carpets and sound
   systems for the mosques; Korans, food, clothes and blankets against
   the onset of winter; hand-cranked radios to hear government
   broadcasts; doctors and veterinary surgeons. None of this is
   guaranteed to win support, but it helps.

   American soldiers are still involved in a lot of shooting,
   particularly along the border with Pakistan. Indeed, across the
   country, violence has inexorably got worse. This year has seen a
   record number of suicide-bombings as well as a 20% increase in Taliban
   attacks, according to the United Nations. The insurgency has spread
   from the badlands along the frontier with Pakistan to much of the
   country's Pushtu-speaking belt, the Taliban's support base. Kabul is a
   regular target. Although far more American soldiers have been killed
   in Iraq, many more bombs fall in Afghanistan.

   The Taliban can bomb, ambush and intimidate, but cannot conquer
   territory held by Western forces. The question is whether they can
   drain NATO's will to stay on. As one senior Western diplomat admits:
   "Failure is an option."

   Non-kinetic energy

   The mistakes of the past six years of fighting in
   Afghanistan--principally the Americans' decision to have only a "light
   footprint" and the costly diversion into Iraq--have changed the
   mindset of American military commanders. They now regard "kinetic"
   actions (ie, fighting) as a distraction, a preliminary "shaping"
   operation at best. "The decisive operation is non-kinetic," says
   Colonel Martin Schweitzer, commander of Task Force Fury, responsible
   for six south-eastern provinces. His focus is training Afghan forces,
   building roads, schools and clinics and, above all, getting the
   government to "start addressing the needs of the people".

   He has schooled himself in the ways of Pushtunwali, the Pushtun tribal
   code of honour, and has its main tenets on his wall. Next door to his
   office, a group of anthropologists and sociologists known as the
   "human-terrain team" provides him with valuable intelligence, not on
   the enemy but on the society in which they mingle. Colonel Schweitzer
   says what he needs is not more troops but more "non-uniformed
   instruments of power: diplomatic, information and economic",
   especially agronomists and water engineers.

   The colonel reckons that of the 92 districts in his area, the number
   rejecting the Taliban has grown from 19 to 58 in less than a year. The
   change is palpable around his own headquarters at Forward Operating
   Base Salerno, outside the city of Khost. Until last year it used to be
   attacked so often that soldiers called it "Rocket City". No longer.
   Rockets are now a rarity, wild potshots fired from Pakistan. Khost's
   progress against the tide of violence is heartening, especially since
   it lies across the frontier from North Waziristan, the main haven for
   the Taliban and al-Qaeda in Pakistan.

   The Americans say the success is all due to the governor, Arsala
   Jamal. "He is phenomenal. The governor is the centrepiece. We take
   directives from him," says Lieutenant-Colonel Scott Custer (descended
   from George Armstrong Custer, the cavalry officer who lost the battle
   of Little Bighorn) of the 2-321st Airborne Field Artillery Regiment,
   in charge of Khost. The name of his strategy says it all: "Protect the
   Quarterback" (a reference to the vital playmaker in American football
   who needs shielding by his team). It involves creating concentric
   circles of security around Khost of Afghan police and army, with the
   Americans on the outer ring.

                                                                      Pfc
                                                                      Pfc

                                               Custer and his quarterback

   With better security, and with the funds provided by the American
   army, Governor Jamal is able to show progress. "The whole game is
   about confidence-building," he says. "I will never change the minds of
   the bad guys, and the good guys will stay with me. Better security
   builds the confidence of people in the middle."

   The Taliban hate him as much as the Americans love him.
   Suicide-bombers have tried to kill him at least four times since he
   was appointed as governor last year. One of his would-be killers was a
   14-year-old boy from Pakistan who was captured and pardoned.

   Judging from American intelligence intercepts, the Taliban seem
   rattled. "There is a big problem now," one Talib is heard to say.
   "Half [of the people] are with us and the other half are against us."
   Another wrestles with self-doubt: "I hope God directs me in the right
   path. I am not sure if I should do this against my own Afghans. There
   is no point in fighting. Who is the enemy here? We don't have an
   enemy."

   Senior British officers, who until recently regarded themselves as
   experts in counter-insurgency, marvel at the speed with which the
   American army is learning imperial policing. "It is a case of the son
   surpassing the father," says one British officer. Similar changes are
   taking place in the British-controlled province of Helmand. Afghan
   troops have been at the fore of a joint operation with British and
   American forces that retook Musa Qala, the only sizeable town
   controlled by the Taliban, on December 11th.

   The operation, which involved the defection of one Taliban commander,
   will cheer the British after a year of intense but inconclusive
   fighting. Yet the army now finds itself pretty much back to where it
   was in 2006: parcelled out across Helmand's districts, with exposed
   supply lines. The British may have more soldiers, and their outpost
   may be better protected. But the question is whether Afghan forces are
   able to hold the ground on their own. One important objective in
   Helmand has been to reopen the road leading to the Kajaki
   hydroelectric plant to bring up a new turbine and increase the
   electricity supply, but that is still a distant prospect.

   In the neighbouring province of Kandahar, Canadian forces have also
   struggled time and again to recapture the same ground. Fighting the
   Taliban, they quip, is the military equivalent of "mowing the lawn".
   In contrast with the American sector farther east, where troops are
   fighting right up to the border with Pakistan, the British and
   Canadians do not have enough forces to secure their section of the
   frontier, and have abandoned a large swathe of the south to the
   Taliban.

   This year has seen a mini-surge of Western forces, notably from
   America, Britain, Poland and Denmark. Germany and the Netherlands have
   decided to stay in Afghanistan, averting a NATO split. There have been
   successes too, notably the killing of scores of insurgent commanders.
   According to the UN, this has forced the Taliban to appoint Pakistanis
   to replace some of them. But the Taliban have an inexhaustible supply
   of recruits, and a haven in Pakistan in which to organise. They are
   reinforced by foreign fighters linked to al-Qaeda, including Chechens,
   Uzbeks and Turks, who are highly motivated and surprisingly well
   equipped. As the Taliban have been pressed in one area, they have
   moved to cause mayhem elsewhere.

   The Western effort is fragmented. Even close military allies such as
   Britain and America have had rows about tactics. There are two
   separate but overlapping commands, NATO's International Security
   Assistance Force (ISAF) and America's Combined Joint Task Force 82.
   Most training is conducted by another American command. However,
   co-ordination has improved with the appointment of an American,
   General Dan McNeill, to head ISAF. The old distinction between
   "stabilisation", done by NATO, and "counter-terrorism", done by
   America, is blurring.

   On the ground, though, each contingent is fighting its own separate
   war and promoting its separate vision of reconstruction. The fact that
   most countries rotate their units every six months or so makes
   continuity difficult. Americans currently serve 15-month tours, a
   consequence of the acute overstretch of the American army, but it
   means that commanders have time to learn and adapt.

   The state of state-building

   The problem in Afghanistan is not so much the resurgence of the
   Taliban, but the weakness of the Afghan government. The economy has
   grown briskly in recent years, but this has only moved Afghanistan
   from being crushingly poor to extremely poor. Six million children are
   now in school, but 2m still get no education.

   Mr Karzai's government is dependent on foreign aid for about half of
   its budget. Much of the government is ineffective and often corrupt.
   One Western diplomat reckons there are just 200 competent people in
   the whole of the Afghan bureaucracy. The administration of provinces
   and districts, often the only contact between villagers and the
   government, is even more rickety. Provincial governors symbolise the
   state, but policies and budgets are controlled by ministries in Kabul.

   The political balance in Kabul has become more uncertain. The Afghan
   government is essentially a fusion of the anti-Taliban Northern
   Alliance of warlords, dominated by ethnic Tajiks, with a Pushtun head
   in the form of Mr Karzai. Not only have many of the Pushtun tribes
   risen up against the government, but members of the Northern Alliance
   have now formed a political opposition movement with royalists and
   ex-communists.

   Whether by design or by chance, the UN does not fill the vacuum in
   governance. Donors are at odds too. Britain gives most of its aid
   directly to the Afghan government, but America, by far the biggest
   donor, worries about corruption and prefers to entrust its aid
   projects to private American contractors.

   Much of the development work falls by default to army officers,
   working though civil-military groups known as "provincial
   reconstruction teams" (PRTs). Development charities such as Oxfam in
   Britain complain this runs against good practice in aid work; it
   focuses on short-term fixes rather than long-term development, results
   in vastly different levels of spending (the American PRTs are richer
   than the others) and blurs the line between soldiering and traditional
   aid work. There are many stories of armies building schools without
   teachers, and clinics without medicines. Yet imperfect as the PRT
   system may be, military commanders say they have little choice but to
   rely on them. Traditional aid workers will not, or cannot, venture
   into the more dangerous areas of the country.

   Arguably the biggest danger to the future of Afghanistan comes not
   from the external Taliban enemy but from two interconnected internal
   ones: corruption and opium. The police are too often regarded as
   predators rather than protectors. The appointment of police chiefs,
   particularly in posts along lucrative drugs-smuggling routes, is rife
   with corruption. The government and donors are attempting, with mixed
   success, to clean up the force by weeding out tarnished or unqualified
   officers, and raising police salaries to match those of the army. And
   once again, foreign soldiers are stepping in. For instance, America's
   1-503rd infantry regiment has used a former senior FBI investigator to
   arrest an Afghan commander in Paktika accused of funding the Taliban.

   The bigger source of money for the Taliban is illicit poppy
   cultivation. Afghanistan produces 92% of the world's opium-related
   drugs. This year's record crop came overwhelmingly from Helmand, as
   well as other embattled regions. The drugs trade makes up about
   one-third of Afghanistan's GDP. ISAF commanders, who had avoided
   involvement in counter-narcotics, now acknowledge that insurgents and
   drugs-smugglers operate symbiotically and must be tackled together.

   Here too, views are split. The American ambassador to Kabul, William
   Wood, is an enthusiastic supporter of aerial herbicide spraying to
   eradicate the crop. The British, in charge of overseeing the fight
   against opium, worry that this will turn the farmers against the
   Western forces. So far there has been a messy compromise: limited
   manual eradication that has been beset by corruption. It is not just
   the Taliban who benefit from opium; members of the government, even
   close relatives of Mr Karzai, are routinely accused of being drugs
   lords. In the long run, the answer lies in stability and rural
   development. In the short term, few actions would make the government
   more popular than the prosecution of some big bosses of the opium
   trade.

   The West's best weapon

   Like the Greeks, the British and the Soviets before them, America and
   its allies are discovering the old adage that Afghanistan is easy to
   invade, but difficult to control. Can they defy history? Perhaps, but
   only if they accept that a military victory is not possible and that
   they will have to stay for a long time.

   Western countries still enjoy an important asset: the support of
   ordinary Afghans who have no desire to return to the harshness of
   Taliban rule or to the civil wars of the past. Recent polls (see
   chart) show that Afghans are much more strongly in favour of foreign
   forces than Iraqis. However, growing insecurity and civilian
   casualties in air raids are eroding the West's position, especially in
   the south.

   Western opinion is just as important. Gordon Brown, Britain's prime
   minister, was right to announce on December 12th his plan for
   "Afghanisation" of the military campaign, gradually focusing more on
   mentoring and training Afghan forces and economic development. He said
   an effort would be made both locally to recruit armed village guards
   and encourage Taliban to give up their weapons, and regionally to
   improve co-operation.

   Given the shortage of Western troops, Afghanistan's best hope lies in
   expanding and improving its own forces. Afghan soldiers are respected
   both as symbols of the nation and as tough fighters; but the Afghan
   army, which will grow to 70,000 next year, needs to be greatly
   increased. For years it will need to be partnered with Western units
   able to provide close air support, transport and medical evacuations.
   It makes sense to give ISAF more of an Afghan complexion, with plans
   to appoint an Afghan general to help co-ordinate operations. The
   Afghan police will need even more money and training. Once again it is
   America that has taken on the main burden of training the police,
   while Europe's effort has been half-hearted.

   Above all the Afghan government--particularly in the provinces and
   districts--needs to be made more effective. Mr Karzai complains that
   he gets too much contradictory advice from the 40-odd allies in ISAF.
   The appointment of a strong international civil co-ordinator to
   energise the reconstruction effort, and even to give political
   direction for the military campaign, is long overdue.

   Paddy Ashdown, the British politician and former soldier who served as
   the international overseer of Bosnia, is the leading candidate to
   become the new UN chief. He should also be "double-hatted" as the NATO
   civilian representative (and perhaps also as the European envoy). Some
   worry that such a "super-envoy" would either undermine the authority
   of Mr Karzai, or be ineffective because of American predominance.
   There are risks in a foreigner meddling in Afghanistan's intricate
   tribal power game. But the bigger risk is to leave Afghanistan
   violently adrift.

