
   Electoral humiliation marks the end of the Chen Shui-bian era 

                                                                       AP

                                     AP


   CHEN SHUI-BIAN, Taiwan's president, called it the worst defeat in the
   history of his Democratic Progressive Party (DPP). After eight years
   of Mr Chen's lacklustre rule, it was routed in the legislative
   election on January 12th. The opposition Nationalist party, the
   Kuomintang (KMT), which wants much closer ties with China, is girding
   itself to return to power.

   Having won more than 70% of the parliamentary seats, the KMT hopes its
   candidate, Ma Ying-jeou, will stroll to victory in the presidential
   poll on March 22nd. Under Mr Ma, the KMT--which ruled all of China
   until it fled the Communists to take refuge in Taiwan in
   1949--predicts rapid improvements in relations with China: regular
   direct flights between Taiwan and the mainland (non-existent since
   1949); many more Chinese tourists; and fewer investment barriers
   between the two sides.

   But Mr Ma cannot rest easy. As they announced their victory in the
   legislative polls, he and his colleagues did not look jubilant. The
   DPP's share of the seats had fallen from nearly 40% to under a
   quarter. The Taiwan Solidarity Union, whose support had helped it
   control about 45% of the seats in 2004, was wiped out. Yet the DPP's
   share of the vote, 38%, was much the same; and turnout, at under 60%,
   was low. The DPP believes many of its voters stayed at home. They
   could still, despite what the polls say, tip the balance in favour of
   the DPP's presidential candidate, Frank Hsieh.

   Mr Hsieh must be feeling a little happier now that he has taken over
   the chairmanship of the DPP from Mr Chen, who stepped down to atone
   for the defeat. (He will relinquish the presidency in May, on reaching
   the two-term limit.) Mr Chen had tried in vain to rally support for
   the DPP by playing up Taiwan's separateness from China. Mr Hsieh is
   more loth to provoke the Chinese and shares the KMT's desire for
   closer economic ties. He will want to distance himself from Mr Chen,
   some of whose family members and aides have been dogged by allegations
   of corruption.

   The economy will be a big issue in the presidential poll. Taiwan's GDP
   has been growing at 4-5% annually for the past three years.
   Unemployment has stayed at around 4% and inflation last year averaged
   below 2%. But despite these respectable figures, many in Taiwan
   believe the economy would do better still if opened further to China.
   The DPP's fears of a "hollowing out" of Taiwanese manufacturing as the
   island's industries move to the mainland have failed to materialise.

   The DPP administration has tried some opening up. In the face of
   China's bar on direct contact with Taiwan's government, it has allowed
   negotiations between quasi-private bodies from the two sides, aimed at
   allowing 1,000 mainland tourists a day to visit the island without
   having to pass through a third country, as Taiwan now requires. At
   present only a couple of hundred Chinese tourists come each day.
   Agreement has been held up by bickering over whether such tourism
   should be described as between countries. China apparently believes
   that it would be easier to deal with Mr Ma, who wants 3,000 a day.

   Taiwan's hoteliers and shopkeepers, mindful of how big-spending
   Chinese tourists have helped Hong Kong's economy, are anxious for a
   breakthrough. In the central city of Taichung, the mayor, Jason Hu of
   the KMT, says three five-star hotels have been built in the past two
   years to prepare for the Chinese influx. With no sign yet of its
   arrival, the hotels are suffering. Despite the KMT's own
   stand-offishness towards China until the 1990s, Mr Hu unabashedly
   blames the DPP.

   The KMT's supporters say that if their party held both the presidency
   and the legislature, it would end the deadlock of Mr Chen's rule,
   during which the KMT and its allies have controlled enough seats to
   block DPP legislation. The KMT's plans are ambitious. It says it will
   boost GDP growth to at least 6% a year, with the help of more than $80
   billion in government spending over the next eight years on a variety
   of big projects ranging from sewage-treatment plants to
   public-transport projects. Vincent Siew, a former prime minister and
   Mr Ma's running-mate, says the party may even revive plans--vigorously
   opposed by the DPP--to expand the country's nuclear-power capacity.

   The KMT's ideas for dealing with China are no less ambitious. Mr Siew
   says a cap on investment in China by any Taiwanese company--of 40% of
   its net worth--would be lifted. Direct Chinese investment in Taiwan
   would be allowed for the first time. Su Chi, a KMT legislator, says an
   agreement with China on direct scheduled flights and cross-strait
   shipping would be reached within a year.

   Mr Ma has said that as president he would not enter talks with China
   about reunification. But if China removed the hundreds of missiles it
   has pointed at Taiwan, he would discuss a peace agreement. Last
   October China's president, Hu Jintao, also called for a peace accord,
   but on "the condition of the one-China principle". That is, Taiwan
   would have to accept it is in effect part of the People's Republic.
   Even the KMT balks at that.

