
   But there is still a chance to stave off a full-blown insurgency

                                                                      AFP

                                    AFP

                       All too familiar in Mogadishu


   EXPERIENCE teaches that stability in Somalia depends on peace in
   Mogadishu. So recent events in the capital are now the cause of real
   concern--again. The United Nations reckons that 40,000 of the city's
   2m residents have fled increasingly heavy fighting since February. On
   March 21st at least 15 people were killed in one fire-fight, the
   heaviest since the Islamist militias were chased out of the city last
   December. In dreadful scenes reminiscent of the shooting down of an
   American Black Hawk helicopter in the city in 1993, the bodies of two
   dead soldiers were dragged through the streets before being set alight
   by chanting mobs.

   The violence has increased dramatically since the arrival of a Ugandan
   peacekeeping force. The Ugandan troops, under African Union (AU)
   command, have formally taken over from Ethiopia, whose troops have
   occupied Mogadishu since the retreat of the Islamists. The Ethiopians
   are unpopular with ordinary Somalis, who see them as occupiers; the
   Ugandans are also viewed by militants as nothing more than interfering
   foreigners. An Ethiopian soldier was probably among those killed on
   March 21st. Some Ethiopian troops have left, and those who remain have
   withdrawn from public view, including from the presidential palace.
   But they are unlikely to withdraw completely just yet.

   In part, that reflects a failure of the AU. Only 4,000 of the 8,000
   troops the organisation has requested for Somalia have so far been
   committed; of these, only the Ugandans are on the ground. It will be
   hard for them to pacify Mogadishu, even at full strength. The best the
   AU green helmets can hope for, say Somali watchers, is to secure key
   installations and road junctions. A Ugandan force commander says his
   men will patrol only in neighbourhoods where they are welcome. That
   will make them less of a target, but it will also put some areas of
   Mogadishu dangerously off-limits.

   Much depends on the success of a touted national reconciliation
   process. Somalia's transitional government has been bullied and
   bankrolled into making a show of forgiveness, but it is unclear
   whether a national-unity conference planned for April will amount to
   much. Foreign diplomats say the government should reach out to
   moderate Islamists while excluding Mogadishu's warlords. But even with
   the best intentions that is a hard act to pull off. The warlords are
   emboldened, and may be responsible for some of the mortar attacks.
   They certainly see themselves as having legitimate claims to be in
   government.

   But remnant Islamist fighters still account for most of the violence.
   There may be over a thousand of them in or around Mogadishu. Some have
   formed new jihadist groups. Gauging their strength is not easy,
   particularly since they have taken to paying freelance gunmen to
   attack government and Ethiopian positions. The more sophisticated
   nature of recent attacks, together with pugilistic broadcasts made by
   some jihadist commanders in hiding, suggest that they may have the
   makings of a serious insurgency.

   The next few weeks will be critical. The peacekeepers need to hold
   their nerve. The government has to reach out to disaffected clans,
   especially by including them in the building of a new national army.
   And the Islamists could yet miscalculate, as they have done before. A
   grouping of Islamic courts in Mogadishu became popular last year
   because it opposed violence and restored order. Calling for violence
   and provoking disorder could swing the people back behind the
   government.

