
   Can rule by the people be reconciled with the sovereignty of Allah?


   "TURKEY sets a fantastic example for nations around the world to see
   where it's possible to have a democracy coexist with a great religion
   like Islam." Those were George Bush's words of welcome, this week, to
   Turkey's President Abdullah Gul.

                                                                       AP

                                     AP

              In the name of God, let's throw the rascals out

   In decades past, a Turkish leader might have been received at the
   White House with cordial remarks about his country's growing
   prosperity or its contribution to NATO. But it would have been
   strange, perhaps, not to mention religion when hosting a head of state
   who had just set a precedent that was watched with fascination by
   politically active Muslims in many parts of the world. When he became
   president, Mr Gul proved that it was possible for a pious Muslim with
   a headscarved wife to be made head of state, by a perfectly democratic
   procedure, in a country where the army is an ever-vigilant guardian
   against theocracy. For those who insist (whether their arguments are
   theological, or empirical, or both) that Islam and liberal democracy
   are quite compatible, Mr Gul's election (and Mr Bush's exuberant
   reaction to it) was a badly needed nugget of hope in a year when that
   cause has seen quite a lot of setbacks.

   Among American officialdom, confidence in the prospects for democracy
   in Muslim (and in particular, Arab) lands has fluctuated under the
   Bush administration. It reached a high point, arguably, in mid-2005,
   when Condoleezza Rice, the secretary of state, declared in Cairo that
   the bad old days of favouring stability over democracy were over--and
   then it plunged again the following January when the Islamist Hamas
   movement swept to victory in Palestine.

   For political scientists, especially those who have studied the
   phenomenon of "Muslim Democracy" in the belief that the Turkish case
   could be a precedent for others, the recent turmoil in Pakistan and
   the assassination of Benazir Bhutto have been a great tragedy in a
   pivotal country that had the potential to develop a new concordat
   between Islam and open politics.

   Vali Nasr, a professor at America's Tufts University, terms "Muslim
   Democracy" a newish and potentially decisive force in the non-Arab
   parts of the Muslim world. In his view, the recent experience of
   Turkey, Pakistan, Bangladesh, Malaysia and Indonesia all points to a
   single truth: wherever they are given the chance, Muslim Democratic
   parties (which are responsive to public opinion and thrive in an open
   political contest) can prevail over harder-line and more violent
   varieties of political Islam.

   Among the parties Mr Nasr identifies as Muslim Democratic are the
   faction of the Pakistani Muslim League that held sway until the
   military takeover in 1999; the Bangladesh Nationalist Party (in power
   till last year's coup); Malaysia's ruling UMNO party; and a cluster of
   mildly Islamic parties that share power in Indonesia (see [4]article).
   Exhibit A for Muslim Democracy is Turkey's Justice and Development
   (AK) party, which won its democratic spurs after several decades of
   sparring between generals and pious politicians. As with several other
   Muslim Democratic parties, the AK's rise reflected economic growth and
   the advent of a devout but non-fanatical middle class which resents
   the older elites of bureaucrats and generals.

   But what if any is the intellectual ground for Muslim Democracy? Roman
   Catholic thinking had to tread a long path before it reconciled its
   belief in human sinfulness with popular sovereignty; Christian
   Democracy, an important force in post-1945 Europe, was the result.

   Abdal-Hakim Murad, a British Muslim scholar, argues that Muslim
   Democrats have an easier road to travel because Islam's view of human
   nature is a less pessimistic one. But several factors have helped to
   make the Muslim debate about democracy difficult and inconclusive.
   Most of the schools of Muslim thought that have emerged over the past
   century have been intensely interested in political theory, and also
   intensely concerned with precedents set at the dawn of the Muslim era.
   But the precedents are not clear: some caliphs took power by
   inheritance, others through consensus, others by force.

   Khaled Abou El Fadl, an Egyptian-born law professor, has pointed to a
   passage from the Koran which seems to endow human beings with a
   special mandate to look after their own affairs.

     When your Lord said to the angels: "I have to place a vice-regent
     on earth," they said: "Will you place one there who will create
     disorder and shed blood, while we intone Your litanies and sanctify
     Your name?" And God said: "I know what you do not know."

   That verse, Mr Fadl has argued, seems to imply that far from sitting
   back and letting God do everything, human beings must organise their
   own society.

   Another relevant text is the story of Ali, the fourth Muslim caliph,
   whose leadership was challenged by a rival. To the fury of his zealous
   supporters, Ali agreed that conflicting claims should be submitted to
   arbitration. Posterity found Ali right and his critics wrong: human
   institutions do have a place in settling issues of state.

   From Cairo to California

   For anyone who looks to Islam's foundational texts as the ultimate
   arbiter of truth, these are resonant allusions. But arguments in
   favour of Islam's compatibility with democracy are in perpetual danger
   of being drowned out by a mixture of depressing news from Muslim lands
   and zealous ideologues on both sides of a looming civilisational
   divide.

   Whether or not they condone violence, many of the most strident
   advocates of "political Islam" still take their cue from Sayyid Qutb,
   an Egyptian thinker, executed in 1966, who regarded secular democracy
   (and all other secular forms of government, including socialism) as
   blasphemy pure and simple. In places ranging from British campuses to
   the jails and torture chambers of Uzbekistan, there are zealous
   ideologues who follow the Qutbist line that all human agencies of
   power are a violation of the sovereignty of God. Neatly converging
   with the anti-democratic zeal of these malcontents is an increasingly
   respectable argument, among sceptical Western observers of Islam,
   which holds that the Muslim faith, by its very nature, cannot be other
   than theocratic. If that is true, then encouraging moderate--in the
   sense of apolitical--versions of Islam can only be a waste of time.

   In the United States, in particular, an"essentialist" mistrust of
   Islam in all its forms has been gaining ground. One recent sign of
   this mood: when Keith Ellison from Minnesota became the first Muslim
   congressman, he was challenged, during his first television interview,
   to prove that he was not "working for our enemies".

   But in America's free-ranging debates, where the spectrum of views on
   Islam is probably wider than in any Muslim land or even in Europe,
   there are also many voices on the other side. Mr Fadl makes his case
   for the compatibility of democracy and Islam from the University of
   California at Los Angeles, probably a more secure setting than his
   native Cairo.

   Meanwhile Firas Ahmad, a columnist who co-edits a glossy Muslim
   monthly from his home in Boston, maintains that a lot of Islamic
   history--as well as the dilemmas of modern times--should be
   reconsidered in the light of the robust separation between religion
   and state which (on his reading, at least), Muslims have quite
   frequently, and cheerfully, maintained. In modern America, Muslims can
   make a big contribution to debates about greed and social justice,
   while fully respecting the country's secular constitution. And his
   favourite passages in history are the bits where believers (often
   courageous Sufi mystics) spoke truth to power, not the instances when
   pliant greybeards did favours to the sultan.

   There are, in short, many interesting things to say about Islam and
   democracy. The pity is that they are mostly being said in the West,
   not in Islam's heartland.

