
   President Mwai Kibaki is loth to back down after his fraudulent
   election victory

                                                               AP/Reuters

                                 AP/Reuters


   IT SEEMED that Kenya had pulled out of its nosedive into violence
   earlier this week--until the "big man" complex pulled the country back
   towards disaster. Now the recalcitrance of its disputed president,
   Mwai Kibaki, egged on by his bloody-minded backers, threatens to wreck
   east Africa's most prosperous economy and increases the chance of a
   drawn-out civil conflict. Ghana's president, John Kufuor, who
   currently chairs the African Union, is still trying to mediate, but so
   far in vain. Despite a concerted call for peace by Kenya's leading
   editors, businessmen and bishops, the prospect of an early compromise
   looks dim.

   Earlier, the opposition leader, Raila Odinga, who claims he was
   cheated of victory by Mr Kibaki thanks to a false count after the
   presidential poll on December 27th, told his Orange Democratic
   Movement supporters to put off planned demonstrations in order to give
   international mediation a chance to work. Mr Odinga continued to
   insist that Mr Kibaki was an "illegal" president but his agreement to
   avoid the possibility of a lethal street clash between the Oranges and
   security forces was seen as a breakthrough. The next day, however, Mr
   Kibaki responded with apparent contempt to Mr Odinga's climbdown by
   unilaterally appointing 17 cabinet ministers. That was also a slap in
   the face of foreign diplomats who thought they had a deal with Mr
   Kibaki not to make any appointments until the business of mediation
   had run its course.

   So more riots broke out--and more deaths look certain. At least 500
   Kenyans have so far been killed. Thousands more have been wounded by
   gunfire, hacked by machetes, beaten with sticks, or scorched in fires.
   Most of the victims have been Kikuyus, from Mr Kibaki's tribe, the
   country's largest and richest, making up some 22%. The local Red Cross
   estimates that 200,000 Kenyans have been displaced, nearly all of them
   for ethnic reasons. The worry is that reprisals by Kikuyu gangs in
   areas where Kikuyus predominate, particularly against Mr Odinga's
   fellow Luos, may feed a fresh cycle of bloodshed. "If the reprisals
   start," says a senior civil servant, "I fear you could see the armed
   forces breaking into tribal factions."

   Mr Kibaki's choice of cabinet ministers does not suggest he is
   reaching out to those who opposed him. In the parliamentary poll, held
   at the same time as the presidential one, Kenyans sent a clear message
   of disgust with corruption and cronyism. Oranges won 95 of the 210
   contested seats, more than twice as many as Mr Kibaki's Party of
   National Unity; half of Mr Kibaki's cabinet lost their seats. Yet
   several of his new ministers are widely regarded as some of the most
   venal of the old guard; several have been threatened with travel bans
   to the European Union, including Britain, because of corruption
   allegations.

   Among those thought to be encouraging Mr Kibaki to give no ground are
   John Michuki, who previously ran internal security and is now in
   charge of roads, and George Saitoti, who goes from education to handle
   internal security. Mr Michuki was involved in attempts during Mr
   Kibaki's first term to use foreign mercenaries to stop local media
   from publishing some stories to do with organised crime. This pair's
   prominence suggests that Mr Kibaki is ready to use repression to stay
   in power.

   Mr Kibaki has also failed to break with his discredited predecessor,
   Daniel arap Moi, three of whose sons lost their seats in parliament:
   Mr Kibaki has put several of Mr Moi's favourites into the cabinet,
   including Uhuru Kenyatta, a son of Kenya's founding president. He has
   also named Kalonzo Musyoka, a Kamba, who came a distant third in the
   presidential race, as vice-president, in the hope of winning his
   party's much-needed votes in parliament.

   The Daily Nation, Kenya's biggest newspaper, reckons that it has been
   the country's darkest period since independence in 1963. The violence
   has not ceased since the election result. The tension has been
   worsened by incendiary text messages, such as one that falsely said a
   busload of Luo women and children had been blown up by Kikuyus in
   western Kenya.

   The security forces can barely cope without resorting to violence.
   There were too few to contain opposition protesters peacefully in
   Nairobi in the days after the poll--but enough to gun them down. "No
   Raila, no peace," went the standard chant that has landed a number of
   Orange supporters in prison. Protesters near the smart Yaya shopping
   mall, a mile or so from central Nairobi, seemed poised to loot the
   building. A few started throwing stones at its windows, while others
   pulled petrol bombs out of sisal sacks. Hot-heads spoke of taking
   their fight against Mr Kibaki to the bush in a war of liberation.
   "Have you ever seen someone cut up, the legs here, the head over
   there?" asked a youth brandishing a rusty spanner. "That's what we'll
   do to the Kikuyus." Just as gunfire threatened to break out, William
   Ruto, an Orange leader, persuaded the mob to back down.

   The violence spreads

   For days, Nairobi's slums were sealed off by security forces, causing
   widespread hunger. In Kibera, on the city's south side, what little
   food there was reached prices the poor could not possibly afford.
   Children collapsed under barrages of tear-gas. There was not enough
   water to wash their eyes. Corpses lay unclaimed in the fetid dust,
   some shot, others slashed. Ethnic cleansing went on despite the siege.
   Thousands of Kikuyus fled their tiny shacks, escaping through the
   nearby Ngong forest with dirty bundles of meagre possessions to take
   refuge in Nairobi's showground beyond. Kikuyus trying to enter Kibera
   were dragged out and beaten up by Luos.

   The violence was, if anything, worse upcountry, where gangs of young
   men from the Kalenjin group turned on their Kikuyu neighbours in the
   Rift Valley. Many of the deaths there, including the burning to death
   of Kikuyus in a church, occurred in and around the town of Eldoret,
   whose Kikuyus fled, taking buses or lorries south to Nakuru, under
   government protection.

   The conspicuously quietest bit of the country has been the Kikuyu
   highlands stretching up north of Nairobi to the slopes of Mount Kenya.
   About 97% of Central Province's voters were officially said to have
   plumped for Mr Kibaki. In mainly Kikuyu towns such as Thika, Luos
   working in government offices have fled. "We are not sure if they will
   come back," says the district commissioner. "The situation is worst in
   the coffee estates and isolated farms. We can't offer protection
   there."

   Poorer Luos still working in Thika live harmoniously with other tribes
   in makeshift settlements on the edge of the town. "We don't say
   anything too loud," says a young Luo. "The problem is the Kikuyus are
   too arrogant. They feel they have a right to rule." Unsurprisingly,
   the Kikuyu view is different. "We're civilised and they are not," says
   a Kikuyu mini-bus driver in the market-place, to applause from his
   friends.

   So far the instability has cost the country $1 billion, says the
   finance ministry. The cost of borrowing abroad is likely to rise, the
   overvalued Kenyan shilling will fall, tourism has already been badly
   hit and foreign aid may be cut back. Planned privatisations will get
   greater scrutiny; some may falter. There may not be enough money to
   keep Mr Kibaki's promise of free secondary education for all. But
   breaking it would sorely undermine him.

   Kenya's neighbours are being hurt too. Several, such as south Sudan
   and Uganda are landlocked, so rely on Kenya's roads and its port of
   Mombasa for their trade to the outside world. Uganda is particularly
   jittery. Its president, Yoweri Museveni, wants Kenyan troops to
   protect oil en route to the Ugandan border and says Uganda must build
   its own oil terminal to lessen its dependency on Mombasa. While
   Kenya's big men refuse to compromise, the country's reputation as a
   beacon of stability in a sea of regional turbulence is in tatters.

