
   A doughty fighter of corruption is sent away for re-education 


   NIGERIANS are painfully aware of how much corruption has cost their
   country--over $400 billion, according to official estimates. That is
   the equivalent of about two-thirds of all the aid given to the whole
   of Africa since the 1960s, and more than anything else explains why
   most people in this oil-rich country still live in poverty.

   Yet in recent years the government had started a belated fight against
   corruption. And if one man has become the symbol of that campaign it
   is the crusading young head of the Economic and Financial Crimes
   Commission (EFCC), Nuhu Ribadu. Since 2003, Mr Ribadu has attained
   almost mythic status among his countrymen by charging and prosecuting
   the politicians, and particularly the state governors, who are
   responsible for most of the fraud and looting of public funds. For the
   first time, he gave Nigerians hope that their country could actually
   be different. So the news on December 27th that Mr Ribadu is being
   forced to resign on a technicality has caused deep dismay among his
   supporters. It is also very worrying for the future of Africa's most
   populous country.

   In short, Mr Ribadu finally got too close to the top. His
   anti-corruption agency, once accused of prosecuting only the
   government's political foes, has under the new president, Umaru
   Yar'Adua, been pursuing the former state governors who lost their
   immunity from prosecution after leaving office last May. He had some
   big successes. The EFCC has arrested seven governors, including two of
   the most notorious, Ayo Fayose of Ekiti State and James Ibori of Delta
   State, both of whom spent Christmas in prison. Another round of
   arrests was planned for early January.

   The prosecution of Mr Ibori was the boldest. The former governor of
   the oil-rich Delta State received a salary of less than $25,000 a
   year. Last August a court in London ordered a freeze on $35m of his
   worldwide assets. Despite this, he was thought to be untouchable in
   Nigeria because of his political connections. He is a prominent leader
   of the ruling People's Democratic Party and was a major funder of Mr
   Yar'Adua's election campaign. So when Mr Ibori was arrested on
   December 12th many Nigerians gasped--and then cheered. Among other
   charges against him was an attempted $15m bribe of the EFCC to drop
   the case against him. "He didn't realise that it was being recorded,"
   said a commission official.

   It was also the arrest of Mr Ibori, however, that tipped the scales
   against Mr Ribadu. Two weeks later came the announcement that Mr
   Ribadu would have to resign to attend a one-year course of study at
   the National Institute of Policy and Strategic Studies in Jos.
   Technically, a man of Mr Ribadu's senior rank has to have done this as
   part of his qualifications; the head of the police said that the
   "transfer" was only to make Mr Ribadu "a better officer". In fact, Mr
   Ribadu could probably teach the course himself; the former president,
   Olusegun Obasanjo, did not insist on it. In any case, few are in any
   doubt as to the real reason for Mr Ribadu's sudden obligation to go
   back to school. Nervous former state governors pressured--and
   blackmailed--Mr Yar'Adua into letting the police chief sack Mr Ribadu
   to spare them any more prosecutions.

   For, right now, Mr Yar'Adua needs all the political support he can
   get. The president is soon to face a legal challenge to his own
   election in a tribunal. He cannot afford to lose friends--and the
   ex-governors are among the strongest in his People's Democratic Party.
   They also have the president's ear because several of them, not least
   Mr Ibori, could probably produce damning evidence of the widespread
   election rigging that brought the president to office.

   Yet sidelining the head of the EFCC in this way is terrible news for
   Nigeria. The commission is popular--the second most trusted
   institution in the country, according to a 2007 poll. The agency's
   more than 200 convictions over four years have resurrected
   international confidence in the country. With a soaring stockmarket,
   investors have poured into Nigeria in the hope that the country was at
   last getting on top of its problems, such as corruption. Now some of
   that progress is at risk.

   For Mr Ribadu, there may still be a way out. He could resign. Or he
   could refuse to go until the orders come directly from the president.
   That would leave room for Mr Yar'Adua to back down, and save himself
   as well. But if Mr Ribadu is forced out, as Chris Albin-Lackey of
   Human Rights Watch, a lobby group, puts it, "the message is
   unmistakable. The credibility of the EFCC and the president, someone
   who is genuinely interested in fighting corruption, will be
   destroyed."

