
   Regret and relief as British soldiers lose hope in Iraq

   THE biggest success of Britain's unhappy four-year occupation of Basra
   was its final departure from the city. Under cover of darkness, the
   500-odd men of the 4 Rifles Battlegroup rumbled out of Basra Palace in
   their armoured vehicles on September 2nd with hardly a shot fired or
   bomb detonated.

                                                                       AP
                                                                       AP

                                                    Under new management 

   The soldiers, who had been under almost daily attack, were formally
   "repositioned" to the airport a few miles away. Britain would honour
   its "obligations" in Iraq, said Gordon Brown, the prime minister. But
   after losing some 170 soldiers there, the army knows it is on its way
   out. The question is when it will leave for good.

   Mr Brown will have more to say on the subject in October. His aim will
   be to distance himself from the unpopular war in Iraq without
   undermining fatally his relationship with the Bush administration. The
   betting is that he will keep the current 5,000 troops in Iraq until
   the spring, and then draw them down to about 3,000.

   Based at the airport, the troops will maintain the headquarters and
   logistical support for allied forces in south-eastern Iraq, as well as
   providing special forces to fight alongside the Americans farther
   north. Britain is also supposed to protect southern supply routes and
   maintain "overwatch" for Iraqi forces--training and armed
   back-up--after it hands over control of Basra province later in the
   autumn. In practice, though, the British have no permanent presence on
   so-called "Route Tampa" from Kuwait to Baghdad, and prefer to stay out
   of the way of American convoys. They will do everything to avoid
   having to shoot their way back into Basra.

   Apart from defending themselves from rocket and mortar attacks at the
   airport, the main concern of the British army will be to preserve its
   public image, fending off accusations that it has failed and is
   betraying its allies by leaving. Britain says, with much wishful
   thinking, that Iraqi forces are now able to take charge of security.
   That contention seemed to hold this week as Basra went quiet.
   Lieutenant-Colonel Patrick Sanders, the commander of the 4 Rifles
   Battlegroup, said that 90% of the violence in Basra had been directed
   at the British. Senior officers wonder whether the army chief, General
   Sir Richard Dannatt, was right when he said last year that the British
   had become part of the problem.

   Even if he is right, Britain seems to be at cross-purposes with
   America, which has increased its troops in Baghdad. The loudest
   American critics of Britain are the strongest advocates of the
   "surge", such as retired General Jack Keane. He claims American
   officers are frustrated by Britain's "general disengagement" from
   Basra. Pentagon officials say they accept with misgivings Britain's
   withdrawal, but worry about Mr Brown's intentions.

   They are not alone. Australian and other allied forces in southern
   Iraq fear they may be left in the lurch. Some Australian commanders
   draw comparisons with the fiasco of the British-led assault (and later
   retreat) at Gallipoli in the first world war. They are joking, but the
   British army's reputation for counter-insurgency warfare has been
   damaged. And it was just a few years ago that British soldiers
   patrolling Basra in soft berets mocked the Americans for staying in
   their armoured vehicles.

   The British console themselves with the thought that the real fault
   lies with America and its "intellectually bankrupt" post-war strategy,
   as their former army chief, General Sir Mike Jackson, calls it in a
   new book. And the army is still up for the fight in Afghanistan, where
   more troops may be sent. If that effort also ends in failure, however,
   the army will find it hard to shift the blame to anyone else.

