
   Peace in the south, war in the west and poverty amid riches

                                                                       AP
                                                                       AP

                                                Bashir the great survivor


   THE presidential pardon given to Gillian Gibbons, a British
   schoolteacher who was briefly jailed for allowing her pupils to name
   the class teddy-bear Muhammad, proves how mature and responsible
   Sudan's government is. Such is the solemn opinion of a senior Sudanese
   official.

   Some Sudanese may join in imagining that their country emerged well
   from the teddy-bear affair (although a few sword-waving hotheads now
   blame the state for failing to defend Islam against such blasphemy).
   But to many in this crisis-prone country, as well as to a hissing
   chorus of Muslim commentators elsewhere, the business looked more like
   an embarrassing symptom of sickly xenophobia or, perhaps, an act of
   base demagoguery. In fact, both views, benign and malevolent, are
   probably true. As with so many other aspects of Africa's biggest and
   most turbulent state, it all depends on how you look at things.

   The Islamist regime of General Omar al-Bashir is brutal. For 15 years
   it pursued a vicious jihad against largely non-Muslim rebels in the
   south, then armed and goaded tribesmen in the west to attack rival
   ethnic groups, generating the Darfur tragedy that has left some
   300,000 people dead. Mr Bashir's inflammatory rhetoric and often
   mulish resistance to humanitarian pleading have made Sudan a pariah,
   at least in the West. His hounding of dissidents, corrupt cronyism,
   lack of interest in the poor and favouritism for the capital at the
   expense of the provinces have hardly made him popular at home, either.

   Yet this same regime signed a treaty in 2005 that ended fighting with
   the south, Africa's longest war. It thereby committed itself to
   sharing power and revenue with foes who are hardly angels themselves,
   and to a democratic transition that could yet prove a model for the
   continent. Furthermore, Mr Bashir's government has retreated from the
   fundamentalist fervour unleashed by his 1989 coup. It is hard to
   imagine another Arab capital hosting Christian revivalist meetings in
   its biggest football stadium, as Khartoum does. Unlike some
   neighbouring dictatorships, Sudan's tolerates a lively press,
   opposition parties and the presence of thousands of foreign aid
   workers. It has also survived longer than any regime since Sudan
   gained independence in 1956.

   That longevity owes much to the way that Mr Bashir has cleverly split
   the differences in his often-divided government. Thus, for instance,
   on Darfur the representatives of the more hardline intelligence and
   security ministries, such as Nafie Ali Nafie, have always wanted a
   military solution regardless of the world's sensibilities. The more
   moderate ministers, such as the vice-president, Ali Osman Taha, argue
   that ending Sudan's diplomatic isolation is more important than
   winning the war. The two wings are ascendant at different times, and
   Mr Bashir oscillates between them. It gives Mr Bashir a useful degree
   of ideological flexibility and keeps Western diplomats nicely
   off-balance as well.

   Some officials readily admit to many mistakes in Darfur, and regret
   the carnage. They point in mitigation to such goodwill gestures as
   granting free admission to state universities for students from
   Darfur, and note that it was the rebel parties, not the government,
   which failed to show up for recent peace talks. Even Western diplomats
   plead that much of what appears to be stalling on, for example, the
   deployment of a UN peacekeeping force, has to do with legitimate
   concerns for maintaining sovereignty. But the bald fact remains that
   Khartoum instigated the killing and continues to obstruct the
   peacekeepers.

   Mr Bashir's survival has also been helped by an economic boom, at
   least in Khartoum. The past five years have seen property prices
   quadruple in the capital, the number of cars double and more companies
   started than in the previous 75 years. Oil revenues are pushing $4
   billion a year and economic growth tops 10%. Even in the destitute
   south, a region virtually devoid of infrastructure, the share of oil
   revenues enjoyed by the Sudan People's Liberation Movement (SPLM), the
   former rebel group that now runs this autonomous region, is larger
   than the national budgets of similar-sized African nations. Yet most
   Sudanese beyond the capital remain dismally poor, and the country's
   natural potential, especially in agriculture, remains hugely
   under-exploited.

   The obstinacy of the government over a few divisive issues presents a
   perpetual risk to the north-south peace accord. In October the SPLM
   pulled its ministers out of the national-unity government. Talks are
   under way to redress their grievances. But if differences linger, and
   the careful schedule that provides for elections in 2009 and a
   referendum on southern independence in 2011 begins to slip much
   further, Sudan could find itself sliding back into a swamp deeper even
   than Darfur's.

