
   A country still dangerously adrift


   THE prime minister of Somalia, Ali Mohamed Gedi, has bowed out after a
   year of rivalry with the country's president, Abdullahi Yusuf--in the
   interest, he says, of national unity. In his resignation speech, Mr
   Gedi said he had survived five assassination attempts in three years
   at the helm. A veterinarian, he has seen his share of bone-crunching.
   His father was a colonel in Somalia's intelligence service during its
   steadier Soviet-backed years, a trade Mr Gedi may also have dabbled
   in.

   It was probably the prime minister of next-door Ethiopia, Meles
   Zenawi, who advised Mr Gedi to go. The pair are close. In his days as
   a rebel fighter, Mr Zenawi was protected by Mr Gedi's father. Mr Gedi
   belongs to the Hawiye clan, the most powerful in Mogadishu, Somalia's
   ravaged capital. He has been unpopular with Hawiye elders, some of
   whom have Islamist sympathies so are hostile to Somalia's feeble,
   Ethiopia-backed government. It is unclear whether or not his exit will
   make it easier for Mr Yusuf, now squarely in charge, to strike a deal
   with the Hawiye to deprive jihadist fighters of clan support and
   shelter.

   Mr Gedi flew straight out of Somalia to Kenya, the speed of his
   departure showing how even the toughest patriots are loth to build a
   life in Mogadishu. Most educated emigrés return without their
   children, as life for them is getting worse. The UN says school
   attendance has collapsed; malnutrition and cholera are common.

   The all-out fighting that ripped through Mogadishu in the spring has
   not resumed, but the seaside city remains violent. Jihadist rebels pin
   down Ethiopian troops and peacekeepers from Uganda, the only country
   willing to send troops under the aegis of the African Union. The
   failure of moderate Islamists to create a plausible negotiating
   position at a recent meeting in Eritrea may have strengthened the
   armed radicals, who hope to foment a holy war with "Christian"
   Ethiopia. The threat is not restricted to the Horn of Africa. British
   intelligence says that Somali jihadists may be involved in future
   terrorist attacks on Britain and elsewhere, as they have been already.

   The recent killing of yet another Somali journalist illustrates the
   chaos. Bashir Nur Gedi (no close relation) was the eighth journalist
   to be murdered in Mogadishu this year. Other Somali reporters have
   gone into hiding or left the country; both the government and
   Islamists have targeted them for trying to report freely.

   A sharp increase in piracy is also telling. During their time in power
   last year, Islamists managed to curb attacks on foreign vessels. Now
   they are back up to record numbers. The Americans pursued two ships
   hijacked by pirates this week, one of them a North Korean freighter
   whose crew managed to kill two of the pirates before the Americans
   arrived. There is no sign yet of a French naval escort promised by
   France's new president, Nicolas Sarkozy.

