
   A bitter old row shows no sign of fading


   "SHOULD Eritrea launch another war, we will make certain it will never
   ever dream of entertaining or thinking about war again." So said
   Ethiopia's prime minister, Meles Zenawi, in a recent speech to
   Parliament. His country did not seek war, he stressed. But if Eritrea
   launched a "suicidal" attack, it would be driven into the sea.

   Eritrea has heard it before. Ethiopia tried to drive it into the sea
   at Massawa between 1998 and 2000, and failed. Instead, 70,000 on both
   sides died in trench warfare; a stalemate led to a truce. This time Mr
   Zenawi's belligerence comes as the Eritrea-Ethiopia Border Commission
   wound up business this month, with no agreed demarcation. In 2002 it
   awarded the disputed village of Badme to Eritrea. Ethiopia rejected
   the verdict, and has since used diplomatic verbiage to obfuscate and
   stall.

   Eritrea naturally took the commission at its word but under its
   authoritarian president, Issaias Afwerki, has alienated just about
   every sympathiser. As his rule has become harsher and more erratic,
   the border issue has loomed larger in Eritrea's national psyche. Mr
   Afwerki may disgust his compatriots by torturing and imprisoning his
   critics. But he knows Eritreans will back him over Badme.

   The border is more militarised than ever. According to the
   International Crisis Group, a think-tank, Eritrea has 4,000 troops
   inside a supposedly demilitarised buffer zone and a further 120,000
   dug in along its side of the craggy border that is 1,000km (621 miles)
   long. On its side, Ethiopia has 100,000 troops.

   A UN monitoring force is meant to pack up next month but may stay on.
   The tension gives both countries an excuse to spend more on guns and
   spies, some to be turned on domestic enemies. Neither country can
   afford such things. Ethiopia, at least 75m-strong, is bogged down in
   Somalia and fighting separatists in the Ogaden desert; Mr Zenawi says
   he is putting Ethiopia's defence budget up by 17% to $390m. Eritrea,
   with only 5m people, simply cannot keep up.

