
   Will the Kurds get their way?


   AS YOU drive through the city of Kirkuk, with its drab buildings,
   dusty and rubbish-strewn streets and general decrepitude, you wonder
   why it stirs such anguish at the heart of Iraq's national-unity
   government in Baghdad. One big answer is the huge, sprawling oilfields
   on the city's western fringe.

   But for Kirkuk's Kurds and their brethren in the autonomous Kurdish
   region to the north, it is about far more than just oil. Kirkuk is a
   symbol, they say, of everything Kurdish: their people, their land,
   their history. They say they can be reconciled with their Arab
   compatriots, both Sunni and Shia, only if Saddam Hussein's
   "Arabisation" campaign--the settlement of tens of thousands of Arabs
   in Kirkuk during his three decades in power--is reversed.

   Iraq's president, Jalal Talabani, a Kurd from Kirkuk, called the city
   "our Jerusalem". But while the status of the real Jerusalem looks set
   to remain disputed for many years, most Kurds now think that Kirkuk's
   fate will be satisfactorily sealed this year. Most Arabs still
   disagree. But the tide may be flowing the Kurds' way.

   Last week, Kurdish leaders threatened to quit the government in
   Baghdad, where they are allied to the main Shia block, unless the
   cabinet of Nuri al-Maliki stopped dragging its feet over Kirkuk. A
   deal was then struck: thousands of Arabs who had settled in Kirkuk
   would be compensated with land and money if they went back to their
   original homes, mainly in the south.

   The justice minister, Hashem al-Shibli, said that those who left would
   be paid about $15,000 and given land in their former home towns. Mr
   Shibli, who has been chairing a committee looking into the issue, said
   that Kirkuk's authorities would soon begin giving out forms to Arab
   families to assess who was eligible for resettlement, which would be
   voluntary.

   The minister then surprised everyone by resigning, citing differences
   with the government and his own political block, led by a former prime
   minister, Iyad Allawi, partly over Kirkuk. The controversial Article
   140 of Iraq's new constitution provides for several things: the return
   of Arab "settlers" and a redrawing of the boundaries of Kirkuk
   province, surrounding the city; a census; and then, by November 15th
   this year, a referendum on whether Kirkuk should join the present
   Kurdistan federal region. Kurds calculate that, once enough Arabs have
   left, the vote will go their way. One Arab member of parliament says
   that 12,600 families, which means around 90,000 people, have already
   agreed to go.

   The referendum's exact terms have yet to be drafted. Among other
   things, the Kurds want to adjust the borders of Kirkuk province to
   bring back four Kurdish-populated towns (Chamchamal, Kalar, Tuz
   Kermatu and Kifri) which Saddam had put into other provinces to shift
   Kirkuk's demographic balance against the Kurds. They also want the
   Kurdish region to include a string of mostly Kurdish towns, in a loop
   running from Sinjar, west of (mainly Arab) Mosul, through Makhmur,
   south-west of Arbil, to Mandali in the south-east near the Iranian
   border. The Kurds' geographic borders, they say, should roughly follow
   the line of the Hamrin mountains.

   Many of Kirkuk's Arabs and Turkomen fiercely object to all such ideas.
   The Turkomen say they are Kirkuk's original rulers, while most Arabs
   say Kirkuk is Iraqi and should stay so. Sunni Arab nationalists
   elsewhere in Iraq, plus followers of the populist Shia cleric, Muqtada
   al-Sadr, have denounced the plan to push Kirkuk's Arab families to
   move south. Few Arabs or Turkomen trust the city's Kurdish-dominated
   authorities to treat them fairly. Turkey's government, facing
   elections this year, rejects the Kurds' claims to Kirkuk and says it
   may have to intervene militarily if the city's Turkomen are
   threatened. The Americans say Kirkuk is an internal Iraqi issue and
   are urging the Turks to stay out.

   So there are fears that tensions may yet boil over in a city where
   Kurds, Arabs, Turkomen and Christians edgily co-exist. This week a
   massive bomb hit a police station in a mainly Kurdish district,
   killing 15 people, including children at a nearby school. Such
   attacks, presumably by Sunni insurgents, may increase, in the hope
   that the Kurds delay the referendum. But as things stand, they are
   determined to hold it.

