
                                                                      AFP

                                    AFP

   While things are getting better in much of Africa, Ethiopia risks
   getting left behind


   AS AMERICA surveys the map of eastern Africa, it finds little to take
   comfort from. Somalia is in anarchy, riven by competing warlords and a
   haven for Islamist militants. Sudan is involved in the bloody
   suppression of blacks in its western region, Darfur. Both countries
   are deaf to outside complaints and seem chronically unstable. America
   is thinking of putting Eritrea, briefly a beacon of hope after it
   split from Ethiopia in 1993, on its list of countries that sponsor
   terrorism. But between that grim trio stands Ethiopia, America's hope.

   This ancient country has become an essential ally of America in the
   "war on terror". Last year Ethiopia invaded Somalia in support of a
   UN-backed transitional federal government, which had been threatened
   with jihad by the Union of Islamic Courts (UIC) that had taken over
   Mogadishu, the capital. The Americans joined in, giving vital
   intelligence, to catch al-Qaeda people whom the UIC was sheltering.
   These men, it believed, were responsible for the bombings of the
   American embassies in Kenya and Tanzania in 1998, killing more than
   220 people.

   The West and Ethiopia are co-operating closely against the Islamist
   threat in the Horn of Africa, which threatens the coast of Kenya and
   Tanzania as well. It is alleged that Ethiopia is a destination for
   prisoners interrogated under the CIA's "extraordinary rendition"
   programme. Certainly the Bush administration has been unstinting in
   its praise of Meles Zenawi, the prime minister. It has also vilified
   Ethiopia's neighbour and mortal enemy, Eritrea, which it accuses,
   among other things, of arming and funding the Somali Islamists.

   Mr Zenawi won the West's friendship, too, for his efforts to tackle
   Ethiopia's deep poverty. These have met with some success--so much so
   that Tony Blair has put Mr Zenawi in the vanguard of an "African
   Renaissance". But Ethiopia's upward track as development poster-child
   and dependable ally was rudely interrupted in 2005. That year's
   presidential and parliamentary elections were marred by mass killings
   on the streets of the capital. Police fired on opposition supporters
   and others who were protesting against what they claimed were rigged
   elections. Tens of thousands, including journalists and NGO workers as
   well as opposition activists, were rounded up in a general dragnet;
   many spent weeks, or months, in prison without charge. Opposition
   leaders were accused of hugely inflated crimes, such as high treason
   and genocide. Seventy-one of them were freed only last summer, after
   having to sign a letter admitting their part in inciting violent
   protests.

   These events shattered the West's cosy image of the modernising,
   progressive Mr Zenawi. Appalled Western governments abruptly switched
   off direct financial support to the Ethiopian government, though aid
   has been resumed through indirect channels. And an anti-Zenawi lobby,
   largely funded by the big Ethiopian diaspora in America, now issues a
   stream of anti-government criticism from the United States. A few
   weeks ago the House of Representatives passed a bill condemning
   Ethiopia's human-rights record and pledging money to help opposition
   politics. Though it stands almost no chance of becoming law, it shows
   that Ethiopia is now a subject of fierce controversy.

   On six cents a day

   Ethiopia likes to do things differently. In September it started
   celebrating the new millennium (see picture above), more than seven
   years after everybody else. The country has been out of step in this
   respect since 1582: while the rest of the Christian world changed to
   the revised Gregorian calendar, Ethiopia stuck to the Julian. It also
   still keeps its own time, measured in 12-hour cycles rather than
   24-hour ones.

   Uniquely in Africa, Ethiopia was never really colonised by Europeans.
   But its singular history has been a curse as much as a blessing. As
   the rest of Africa decolonised and modernised, albeit fitfully, after
   the second world war, Ethiopia remained stuck fast in a feudal fantasy
   presided over by a diminutive emperor, Haile Selassie. He was deposed
   only in 1974, by which time the modern world had largely passed
   Ethiopia by and the country had become known for poverty and famine.
   It still is.

   Ethiopia was further damaged by the committee of military officers,
   known as the Derg, that overthrew the emperor. That regime degenerated
   into a "red terror" of gulags and summary executions; it also lost an
   expensive, wasteful war with Tigrayan and Eritrean separatists over
   what would become, in 1993, the new country of Eritrea. The Derg
   produced the dreadful famines of 1984-85, the first to be alleviated
   mainly by the efforts of Bob Geldof and a phalanx of rock stars.

   Since the early 1990s, however, Ethiopia has recovered somewhat under
   Mr Zenawi. Signs of that are evident on the big, pristine campus of
   the University of Arba Minch, more than 500km (311 miles) south of
   Ethiopia's capital, Addis Ababa. The university's president, Tarekegn
   Tadesse, has welcomed 8,000 students this term, a huge number for an
   obscure provincial town of 50,000-odd people. The crowd of freshmen,
   he says, testifies to the government's rapid expansion of tertiary
   education; in the case of Arba Minch, enrolment has increased fourfold
   in seven years.

   It is an inspiring story. The new university buildings springing up
   all over the south are tangible evidence that the aid and development
   money pumped into Ethiopia reaches the people it is meant to. Roads
   are clearly being built, funded largely by the Chinese; schools and
   water-treatment plants are being opened. And there are few complaints
   of corruption, a fact that continues to make Ethiopia popular with
   foreign donors.

   Some of the results are encouraging, too. Infant mortality is said to
   have dropped from 141 per 1,000 live births in 2000 to 123 per 1,000
   in 2005; over 70% of children are now in school, and access to clean
   water has more than doubled in ten years. Furthermore, the government
   can point to the rapid expansion of a few sectors in what is still
   mostly an agricultural economy. The great volcanic lakes of the Rift
   Valley south of the capital are now ringed by vast flower farms,
   mainly exporting to Europe. Flowers earn the country about $88m in
   exports annually, creating some 50,000 jobs in the past few years.

   Yet despite this, after almost a decade of well-intentioned
   development policies, Ethiopians remain mired in the most wretched
   poverty. Officially, about 80% of them live on less than $2 a day.
   Often it is a lot less than that. An area like Sidama, in the south,
   looks green, tropical and improbably fertile, but existence there can
   be precarious. One foreign charity, Action Contre la Faim, recently
   found that the average cash income for households in one area was six
   cents a day. Shocked researchers concluded that the depth of poverty
   there was "far beyond what had previously been thought".

   Visiting the nearby villages confirms these cold statistics. In
   Garbicho Lela, high up in the hills, a nurse estimates that 13% of
   children are severely malnourished. The one shop in the village
   betrays the low level of economic activity; on the weekly market day,
   when over 500 people will walk for hours from the surrounding
   hill-villages to sell a few things, the shop will do only about 200
   birrs ($23) of business. On an average day, it sells two Pepsis. After
   three years of good rains, aid workers reckon that the risk of severe
   food shortages has, for the moment, receded. But so marginal are the
   reserves of food and money here that one bad season could still spell
   disaster.

   The fact is that for all the aid money and Chinese loans coming in,
   Ethiopia's economy is neither growing fast enough nor producing enough
   jobs. The number of jobs created by flowers is insignificant beside an
   increase in population of about 2m a year, one of the fastest rates in
   Africa. Since every mother has about seven children, it is conceivable
   that Ethiopia, with 75m-plus people today, could overtake Nigeria (now
   140m-strong) as Africa's most populous country by mid-century. Just to
   stand still, let alone make inroads into poverty, the country must
   produce hundreds of thousands of jobs a year.

   It is hard to see where they will come from. The government claims
   that the economy has been growing at an impressive 10% a year since
   2003-04, but the real figure is probably more like 5-6%, which is
   little more than the average for sub-Saharan Africa. And even that
   modestly improved rate, with a small building boom in Addis Ababa, for
   instance, has led to the overheating of the economy, with inflation
   moving up to 19% earlier this year before the government took remedial
   action.

   The reasons for this economic crawl are not hard to find. Beyond the
   government-directed state, funded substantially by foreign aid, there
   is--almost uniquely in Africa--virtually no private-sector business at
   all. The IMF estimates that in 2005-06 the share of private investment
   in the country was just 11%, nearly unchanged since Mr Zenawi took
   over in the early 1990s. That is partly a reflection of the fact that,
   despite some privatisation since the centralised Marxist days of the
   Derg, large areas of the economy remain government monopolies, closed
   off to private business.

   Jobs for the boys

   This is where Ethiopia misses out badly. Take telecoms. While the rest
   of Africa has been virtually transformed in just a few years by a
   revolution in mobile telephony, Ethiopia stumbles along with its inept
   and useless government-run services. Everywhere else, a plethora of
   South African, home-grown and European providers has leapt into the
   market to provide Africans with an extraordinary array of cheaper and
   more efficient services, now used even by the poorest of farmers, for
   instance, to check spot prices for agricultural goods in markets miles
   away. And the mobile-phone revolution has created thousands of new
   livelihoods; at times it seems as if every boy on a street corner is
   hawking a top-up card. Not in Ethiopia.

   It is the same story in financial services, where, despite the growth
   of some smaller private banks, no foreign banks are allowed.
   Micro-finance schemes have expanded exponentially, but it remains
   almost impossible to find start-up loans for small or medium
   businesses.

                                                                       AP

                                     AP

                           Patrolling in Somalia

   There is no official unemployment rate, but youth unemployment, some
   experts reckon, may be as high as 70%. All those graduates coming out
   of state-run universities will find it very hard to get jobs. The mood
   of the young is often restless and despairing; many dream of moving
   abroad. It was this mood of resentment that the opposition tapped into
   in 2005, and the capital's maybe 300,000 unemployed young men proved a
   combustible force on the streets. The ruling party, the Ethiopian
   People's Revolutionary Democratic Front (EPRDF), underestimated the
   degree of disillusion with its policies, and thus overreacted when the
   opposition polled much better than expected.

   Unless the private sector is allowed to create jobs, the country's
   problems will continue to mount and the gains of development may be
   squandered. Sooner rather than later, 2m more people a year will
   overwhelm a state that is trying to provide most of the jobs itself.

   The fractious tribes

   Economic failings are Ethiopia's biggest long-term challenge; but its
   worst short-term problems are political. Just as the government is
   slowing the pace of economic expansion for fear that individuals may
   accumulate wealth and independence, so it is failing to move fast
   enough from a one-party state to a modern, pluralist democracy. Again,
   the reason may be that it is afraid to.

   The difficulties stem partly from the country's ethnic make-up. Mr
   Zenawi and the ruling elite are Tigrayans, from the north, a group
   that is only about 7% of the population. The Oromos, mainly in the
   centre and south, comprise 40% of the population and provide most of
   the country's food; but they feel excluded from its economic gains.
   The Amharas, comprising about 22%, are traditionally Ethiopia's
   educated ruling class, providing the leadership both of the Derg and
   of Haile Selassie's empire. The main opposition party in 2005, the
   Coalition for Unity and Democracy (CUD), was largely Amharic; they
   resent the ascendancy of the Tigrayans. And in the south-east Ogaden
   region are Muslim Somalis, who have more in common with neighbouring
   Somalia than with the remote Tigrayans.

   At one time or another, most of these ethnic groups have pursued
   secessionist ambitions at the expense of a greater Ethiopia. The
   government, to its credit, must have thought that it had drawn much of
   the poison of ethnic competition by introducing a new federal
   constitution in 1994, with many powers devolved to the regions, and by
   accepting the independence of Eritrea in 1993.

   But recent events have reignited the threat of ethnic, and thus
   political, instability. The turmoil in Somalia has led to a
   reawakening of the Ogaden National Liberation Front, which in April
   killed 74 workers, including nine Chinese, at an oil-exploration camp;
   the week before last it claimed to have killed 250 government soldiers
   in a gun battle. Some of its leaders want to be part of a greater
   Islamist Somalia, and are probably being helped by the Islamist
   militias there. The Oromo Liberation Front (OLF) also continues to be
   active; though its military activities are disavowed by most Oromos,
   many sympathise with the broad aim of getting a better deal for
   Oromia. The CUD is leading the battle across the Atlantic against Mr
   Zenawi's rule, and Eritrea has tried to stoke each uprising, supplying
   arms to the Oromo rebels and even playing host to its leaders in
   Asmara, the Eritrean capital.

   Unfortunately, despite all the talk of ethnic federalism, the
   government has chosen to crack down severely on what it sees as direct
   threats to Ethiopia's integrity. This, in turn, sparks more
   opposition. The Ethiopian army has made it increasingly difficult to
   get into the Ogaden region, virtually one-fifth of the country; even
   NGOs such as Médecins Sans Frontières have been struggling to provide
   help there. Oromo leaders complain of continuing discrimination
   against them; one of them estimates that as many as 10,000 Oromo
   sympathisers have, over the years, been rounded up and put in prisons
   across the country. Hundreds of those were university and school
   teachers arrested for giving civic-education classes that stressed
   Oromo issues--inciting protests, claimed the government.

   Bulcha Demeksa, an MP and leader of a minority Oromo party, the Oromo
   Federalist Democratic Movement, complains that in the past three
   months thousands more Oromos, many of them his own supporters, have
   been thrown into prison. He says that the government wants to
   extinguish any independent opposition outside the government-sponsored
   official Oromo party, the Oromo People's Democratic Organisation
   (OPDO). Many Oromos claim it is impossible to get state jobs in
   Oromia, such as teaching, unless they join the OPDO; farmers complain
   that they do not get fertiliser unless they join it.

   Human Rights Watch, a New York-based lobby group, says that "while
   this government is an improvement over its predecessor [the Derg], its
   human-rights record is nonetheless extremely grim." The government has
   also become highly sensitive to criticism. The Committee to Protect
   Journalists estimates that only Zimbabwe has produced more exiled
   journalists since 2001, though Eritrea is much fiercer at curbing the
   freedom of the press.

   The Ethiopian government's efforts at political control are supported
   by a wide network of informers and secret police. Critics say it is
   exploiting the jihadist terror threat to link many legitimate
   opposition campaigners and supporters with terrorist groups and take
   them off the streets. The threats from Eritrea, where a new border war
   could erupt at any time, and the Islamists in Somalia are real. But at
   this rate, argues Mr Demeksa, "the ethnic groups are on a collision
   course."

   It does not have to come to that. Many people are working tirelessly
   to bridge the differences. But if such tensions are not eased and the
   lack of jobs and opportunities not addressed, Ethiopia's future could
   get much bumpier. In that case, its friendship in a dangerously
   volatile region would be of little use to the West.

