
   What lies behind the latest bombings in Algeria's capital?


   ONE blast seems to have been aimed at Algeria's constitutional court
   but killed a busload of university students who happened to be passing
   by. The other destroyed the local office of the UN's High Commissioner
   for Refugees and damaged other UN offices across the street. Hospital
   sources reported 76 dead, though the government said 26.
   Responsibility was claimed on Islamist websites by "al-Qaeda in the
   Islamic Maghreb", as Algeria's main terrorist group now styles itself.
   Its declared aim was to strike a blow at "the Crusaders and their
   agents, the slaves of America and the sons of France".

   Following several years of relative calm, Algeria has suffered a spate
   of violence since the spring. This has usually been explained as a
   hangover from Algeria's particularly brutal civil war in the 1990s.
   But the nature of recent attacks reflects a broader global agenda
   promoted by the alliance, announced last year, between local Islamist
   terrorists and al-Qaeda. Nearly simultaneous multiple bombings, aimed
   at maximising terror and carrying a message of "resistance" to
   imagined enemies of Islam, have become a calling card of the terrorist
   group. Previous attacks in Algeria had been smaller strikes aimed at
   police stations and the like. Earlier this year the group tried to
   kill the prime minister.

   The seed for today's terrorism was probably planted in 1992, when
   Algeria's government annulled a second round of elections after
   Islamists had won the first. This led to one of the most spectacular
   outbreaks of violence in modern times, leaving some 200,000 Algerians
   dead. No target, even busloads of schoolchildren, was considered
   illegitimate. It stemmed from a perversion of the Muslim idea of
   takfir (excommunication), whereby al-Qaeda has declared several Arab
   governments, including the Egyptian and Saudi ones, to be apostates
   deserving death.

   Algeria's Armed Islamic Group (GIA) took the condemnation further,
   announcing that anyone not fighting against the government deserved
   the same fate. A splinter from the GIA, the Salafist Group for
   Preaching and Combat (GSPC), has since grown to greater prominence
   than the GIA. This newer group at first promised to avoid the GIA's
   habit of random violence. But in the past six months its violence has
   claimed more civilian lives, often dozens at a time. The latest
   bombings were the bloodiest yet. If the Salafist group was
   responsible, it has broken that promise.

   What makes this possible is the nature of the attack and the close
   links between the GSPC and al-Qaeda. Algeria's Islamists and Osama bin
   Laden collaborated in the 1990s. Their ties became formal last year,
   on the fifth anniversary of the September 11th attacks, when Ayman
   al-Zawahiri, al-Qaeda's deputy leader, named the GSPC as his group's
   North African affiliate. Since then, it has styled itself al-Qaeda in
   the Islamic Maghreb, matching the name of its affiliate in Iraq,
   al-Qaeda in Mesopotamia. Both titles avoid mentioning Algeria and
   Iraq, names of the modern, secular states created by Europeans. Such a
   designation seemed ambitious when the group was engaged in parochial
   fighting. But as attacks have become bigger and deadlier, the group is
   aiming to look more like an organisation in its parent's mould.

   Few expect Algeria to revert to the sustained violence of the civil
   war. An amnesty declared in 2002 has enabled thousands of former
   Islamist militants to return to ordinary life. High oil prices have
   helped resurrect what had been a nearly ruined economy, and in recent
   local elections moderate Islamists failed to make ground. Algerian
   officials say that, by choosing high-publicity targets of low
   strategic value, the terrorists display their own weakness. But they
   still generate terror.

