
   A small European force runs into big problems in central Africa 

   THE idea of sending several thousand European Union (EU) soldiers and
   a bunch of UN policemen to protect 400,000 displaced civilians and
   Sudanese refugees from Darfur who have been sheltering in eastern Chad
   seems well-intentioned, as does sending a handful more to the remote
   north of the neighbouring Central African Republic (CAR). Here, too,
   civilians are being terrorised by local rebels and by some from
   neighbouring countries who use swathes of the CAR's lawless terrain
   for rest, transit and launching attacks.

   But a proposed EU-led mission is fraught with complications. It was
   supposed to be up and running by the end of the year but is far behind
   schedule. The latest hitch is a lack of helicopters, essential for
   ferrying 3,700 soldiers and 300 UN police around 200,000 square
   kilometres (77,000 square miles) of Africa's harshest terrain. Some
   diplomats think the deployment will be postponed until next May.

   Even if the force gets there, it is not clear how it will operate. In
   UN-speak, it will have a "multi-dimensional presence". The soldiers
   and police are meant to stop Darfur's violence spreading west by
   sealing the border. They must also protect the civilians who have fled
   and the aid workers looking after them in Chad. How they will do this
   is fuzzy. The mission's UN Chapter 7 mandate could theoretically let
   it go on the offensive to stop attacks. Or it could simply monitor the
   situation.

   Given the force's limitations, the latter is likelier. A report issued
   by the Massachusetts Institute of Technology reckons the EU would need
   over 10,000 men and a lot of air power. Instead, the force will hope
   its mere presence will be a deterrent.

   Due to be led by an Irishman, the bulk of its soldiers will be French,
   plus some Austrians, Dutchmen, Poles and Swedes. But herein lies
   another problem. France can provide these troops as it already has a
   base in Chad, a former colony. It is already embroiled in existing
   conflicts in both Chad and the CAR, another former possession. So the
   humanitarian intent and neutrality of the EU force is being queried.

   France has, for instance, been using special forces to fight rebels in
   the CAR's north-east. The proposed EU force in that country will, in
   fact, consist of these same 200-odd soldiers merely swapping berets.
   In Chad, France gives logistical and intelligence help to a disliked
   president, Idriss Déby, in his battle against rebels in his country's
   east; some, in turn, have declared war on France and have warned the
   EU that its force will be treated as the enemy because of France's
   participation in it.

   The CAR's government, on the other hand, is keen for anyone to come
   and help control the country's lawless north. Villagers, businessmen
   trying to ply their trade and even the rebels operating there say that
   they, too, want stability. But those who have fled the region's
   violence are sceptical about what the soldiers will really be able to
   do. "I hear things on the radio about this force but let's see what
   happens," says Mamadou Yusuf, an elderly Sudanese refugee from Darfur
   who fled to a camp in the north-east of the CAR. "For now we are
   staying here."

