
                                                            Peter Schrank

                               Peter Schrank

   The last person to leave may not have any lights to turn out


   IT IS hard to imagine that things could get any worse in Zimbabwe.
   But, sure enough, day by day, they do. Since the opposition, NGOs and
   church groups organised a protest rally that was brutally crushed in
   March, the police and militias have been intimidating, arresting and
   beating up political opponents, journalists, lawyers and ordinary
   people alike. The government has even warned the Catholic bishops,
   once considered inviolate, to shut up or suffer the same fate.
   Meanwhile the inflation rate has passed 2,200%; last week the national
   power company announced that it would ration electricity in cities,
   possibly to a meagre four hours a day, just as the southern
   hemisphere's winter is starting to bite.

   Power cuts are already frequent, but the latest blackouts mark a new
   low. Residents of Harare, the capital, have been rushing to get
   firewood and paraffin, though a domestic worker's monthly wage can buy
   only five litres (1.3 American gallons) of paraffin or two litres of
   cooking oil. Many companies, already operating at about 40% of
   capacity, say the cuts will force them to reduce their working hours
   even more. "The whole thing is a nightmare," says Lovemore Mandebvu,
   who runs a small furniture-making factory in Harare. "We don't know
   when we will have power and when it goes. This is affecting our
   output. Then at home water runs out when you are bathing, and the
   electricity goes while you are cooking." Hospitals must use gas
   stoves, coal-fired boilers, fuel generators, solar power and candles.

   Basic staples like maize are becoming harder to buy. The official rate
   for the Zimbabwe dollar is 250 to the American one, but the street
   value is now closer to 32,000. Many Zimbabweans survive only thanks to
   the 3m or so friends and relatives who have emigrated. Every day
   desperate Zimbabweans cross the Limpopo river, braving crocodiles and
   occasionally drowning, to try their luck in neighbouring South Africa.
   Trapped into illegality there, many are exploited and abused.

   Those who stay face the increasingly arbitrary power of the police and
   militias. Since the crackdown in March, there have been raids on
   Harare districts such as Highfield and Glenview, known opposition
   strongholds, where random beatings and arrests have become common.
   President Robert Mugabe's government claims that the opposition
   Movement for Democratic Change (MDC) is responsible for the violence
   and is behind a wave of bombings. The MDC says the bombs are planted
   by the police to justify repression. Last week lawyers protested
   against the arrest of two colleagues and the routine defiance of court
   orders by the police. A march was dispersed and several lawyers
   assaulted.

   The latest efforts of Zimbabwe's neighbours to improve things are
   still going nowhere. After the violence in March, the Southern African
   Development Community, a regional club of 14 countries, mandated South
   Africa's president, Thabo Mbeki, to encourage negotiations between Mr
   Mugabe and his opponents. But the International Crisis Group, a
   Brussels-based think-tank, says that Zimbabwe's ruler has shown no
   willingness to co-operate with the regional initiative to prepare the
   ground for presidential and parliamentary elections due next year,
   when Mr Mugabe looks likely to run again. At present, there is little
   chance the elections will be fair.

   But some of Zimbabwe's neighbours are sounding exasperated. Last week
   the Pan-African Parliament, a talking-shop with a secretariat in South
   Africa, said it would send a mission to investigate human-rights
   abuses. Mozambique's energy company, a big supplier of Zimbabwe's
   electricity, may switch off power unless it gets paid. And South
   Africa's government, long in denial about the crisis on its doorstep,
   has just granted political asylum to Roy Bennett, the MDC treasurer
   who fled Zimbabwe to avoid another arrest. It turned down his
   application last year.

   Still, this rare build-up of pressure was released last week when, to
   the dismay of the United States, the European Union and many others,
   Zimbabwe's minister of environment and tourism, Francis Nhema, was
   elected to chair the UN Commission on Sustainable Development, where
   he will preside over discussions on land and rural development.
   Astonishingly, the UN's African members, whose turn it was to hold the
   rotating post, could think of no better candidate than one from a
   country whose agriculture has been largely destroyed by its
   government's catastrophic policies. Like many other Zimbabwean
   bigwigs, Mr Nhema himself pocketed a farm that was confiscated a few
   years ago--and has already let it lapse into ruin.

