
   Will the political dissidents be spared?

   EARLIER this year, Ethiopian courts released many of the country's
   most important political dissidents from the grim Kaliti jail on the
   outskirts of Addis Ababa. They had been there since they were rounded
   up by police following opposition protests (in which 193 people were
   killed) against flawed presidential elections in 2005. In another
   promising sign of reconciliation, charges against the 38 remaining
   defendants were reduced from treason and genocide to "outrage against
   the constitution" and "incitement to armed rebellion".

                                                                      AFP

                                    AFP

            Berhanu Nega, mayor of Addis Ababa, awaits his fate

   So it was a real shock this week when the state prosecutor called for
   all 38 to be put to death. Those facing the firing squad include Hailu
   Shawel, the elderly head of the Coalition for Unity and Democracy
   (CUD), the main opposition party, and Berhanu Nega, the elected mayor
   of the capital, Addis Ababa.

   Surely not, say queasy diplomats, aid types and even many in the
   Ethiopian government. The prime minister, Meles Zenawi, has made some
   progress in building infrastructure, tackling poverty and attracting
   foreign investment. He has even managed to turn himself into a close
   ally of America by invading Somalia last December to vanquish the
   Islamist regime in Mogadishu, suspected of harbouring al-Qaeda people.
   The last thing Mr Zenawi needs now is the terrible publicity,
   especially in America, that such executions would bring.

   The judge adjourned sentencing until later this month. Even if a death
   sentence is handed down, a carefully worded apology by the dissidents
   could let them walk free. Mr Zenawi would probably go along with that.
   There is now almost as much that unites the government and the
   opposition as divides them. Some back his invasion of Somalia; many
   others agree on the threats posed by Eritrea, Islamist terrorism and
   separatist groups within Ethiopia.

   But Ethiopians are stubborn. Most of the 38 dissidents have refused
   even to recognise the court's legitimacy or to offer a defence. They
   may be unwilling to sign an apology. Then there is the government's
   instinct for brutality. In spasms, it has muzzled, beaten and jailed
   the opposition since the elections of 2005. Thousands of young
   Ethiopians were sent to prison camps. The press has been stamped on.

   All of this puts the United States in a quandary. Ethiopia, despite
   its human-rights record, is a key ally against terrorism. America
   backed Ethiopia's invasion of Somalia. Now it is pressing Mr Zenawi
   urgently to let the dissidents go free.

