
   Will the United States and Iran really start talking, if only about
   Iraq?


   IT SEEMS increasingly likely, after 28 years of formal silence (with
   just the occasional back-channel mutterings and whispers), that
   American and Iranian officials will sit down together, if only to talk
   about Iraq. The two sides are expected to meet, perhaps only at
   ambassadorial level to begin with, on May 28th in Baghdad. However big
   the caveats, it will be a breakthrough. Each side is keen to assert it
   has not flip-flopped. Neither side is sure where such talks might
   lead.

   In fact, the Americans have been saying for some time they would talk
   to Iran--but only about Iraq, not about the Islamic Republic's nuclear
   plans, so long as the Iranians refuse to suspend their enrichment of
   uranium. The rulers in Tehran have also occasionally expressed a
   readiness to engage in such talks. But whenever the prospect has
   loomed large they have backed off. Now, it seems, the Iranians--at
   least, some parts of its fractious establishment--are becoming keener.
   Some members of Iran's parliament have even begun collecting
   signatures to form an Iranian-American friendship committee.

   The American establishment has been fractious too. The vice-president,
   Dick Cheney, sounded as tough towards Iran as ever during a trip to
   the Gulf states last week. But the State Department, under Condoleezza
   Rice, is plainly becoming more flexible. Robert Gates, the newish
   secretary of defence, seems to have swung the Pentagon's weight behind
   Ms Rice.

   The latest diplomatic surge gained momentum earlier this month at an
   international conference on Iraq in the Egyptian resort of Sharm
   el-Sheikh. The Egyptian hosts seated Iran's foreign minister,
   Manouchehr Mottaki, opposite Ms Rice, at a dinner, in the hope that
   the pair might exchange a word or two. But the Iranian walked out in a
   huff, complaining later that the event failed to meet "Islamic
   standards", an apparent reference to a female Ukrainian violinist who
   was wearing a supposedly immodest scarlet dress. Other diplomats
   present thought he may have disliked being bounced unceremoniously
   into a high-level summit.

   But this week things moved on. Iran's president, Mahmoud Ahmadinejad,
   said his government was "prepared and ready" to talk to America, while
   insisting that their troops should "pack their bags" and leave Iraq
   and the Gulf region forthwith.

   It will still be hard to agree, beforehand, on the agenda, even with
   nuclear issues kept off it. The Iranians would be loth to discuss an
   issue that particularly grates with the Americans: the help Iran
   apparently gives to Iraqi Shia militias who plant roadside bombs that
   kill American troops.

   And it will be hard to detach the question of Iraq completely from the
   Iranian nuclear one. Iran keeps its links with Iraq's Shia militias so
   that, if America were to bomb Iran's nuclear facilities, Iran would be
   able to make things even nastier for America in Iraq. It is highly
   unlikely that America would be able to persuade Iran to break those
   links altogether.

   Iran does have pressing if lesser grievances that could be more easily
   dealt with if the two sides did meet. One concerns five Iranians in
   Iraq who the Iranian government insists are diplomats but whom the
   Americans accuse of helping to arm Iraqi militants--and therefore
   arrested, in the Kurdish capital, Arbil.

   Iran has also long wanted the Americans to acknowledge that it has its
   own legitimate security interests in the region, some of them in Iraq.
   And if Iran and America were ever to come to a "grand bargain" that
   did include the nuclear issue, Iran would also expect America to
   disavow any intention of promoting regime change in Tehran and to stop
   helping opposition groups. That prospect is far off.

   Meanwhile, the Americans are still struggling to enlist the help of
   other nearby countries to stabilise Iraq, where the war is as bloody
   as ever. At Sharm el-Sheikh, they had hoped to get firmer promises
   from countries such as Saudi Arabia and Kuwait to forgive the $50
   billion or so of debt that Iraq estimates it owes; only vague noises
   were forthcoming. The Saudis say that, before they start being
   generous, the Iraqi government should try harder to accommodate Iraq's
   Sunni Arabs. And Russia first wants Iraq to recognise a Saddam-era oil
   contract.

   Yet the Sharm el-Sheikh meeting was a bit more fruitful than other
   attempts to get the outside world to help Iraq. The Saudis, for
   example, have more or less admitted that the new political order, led
   by Iraq's Shias, is there to stay. And American diplomats say they had
   a useful talk with the Syrians. As Syria seems to be edging out of its
   isolation in the region, it may--to please the Americans--be prepared
   to do more to stem the flow of people and munitions across the border
   to insurgents in Iraq.

   A new factor is that Iraq's neighbours guess that America is
   increasingly likely to leave Iraq within the next two years,
   especially if a Democratic president takes office. That prospect is
   beginning to concentrate Arab minds. Some fear that Iraq's sectarian
   mayhem could spread dangerously beyond its borders. Most of Iraq's
   nervous Arab neighbours do not want a bloody American-Iranian bust-up.

