
   The ruling party has purged itself of some of its tensions--for now


   WHAT a difference a few days make. When the ruling African National
   Congress (ANC) opened its policy conference outside Johannesburg last
   week, some boisterous delegates, singing and dancing, were waving
   flags of support for the party's number two, Jacob Zuma, who was
   sacked as South Africa's deputy president in 2005. A group of
   teachers, who had been on strike for nearly a month, picketed in front
   of the meeting hall. But by the time the get-together finished, ANC
   delegates were all back on-message, cheering wildly for President
   Thabo Mbeki, and the public-service strike was over.

                                                                  Reuters

                                  Reuters

         Mbeki and Zuma; smiles for the cameras, knives in the back

   This latest outbreak of amity and goodwill may not last long. In
   December the party has to choose its next leader, who will then stand
   an excellent chance of becoming the country's next president. The
   forthcoming decision has split the party. Mr Zuma's supporters are
   convinced that his sacking from the government, after his financial
   adviser was convicted for corruption, was nothing but a political move
   to block him from the top job. Since then he has been acquitted on
   charges of rape, though he may still be charged with corruption
   himself.

   The support inside the ANC for Mr Zuma reflects a wider resentment.
   Many party members feel that under Mr Mbeki too much power has been
   concentrated within the president's office and that government
   officials have sidelined the party. The ANC's allies in the Communist
   Party and the trade unions also feel left out. And they have
   criticised the government's economic policy for being too friendly to
   business.

   Some of these tensions seem to have been soothed by the intense
   discussions at the policy conference. One notable recommendation was
   to decentralise the appointment of mayors and provincial premiers,
   which has rested with the party's leaders since 1997. This should help
   pacify those who feel that the leadership has become too
   authoritarian.

   A pragmatic compromise was crafted around the succession. Mr Zuma's
   supporters came to the conference pushing for the ANC president to be
   made the party's automatic candidate for president of the country.
   This would have disqualified Mr Mbeki from continuing as party leader,
   as he is constitutionally barred from running for a third term as
   South Africa's president in 2009. But in the end the conference
   recommended only that it would be preferable to combine the two jobs,
   without changing the party rules to say so explicitly. And Mr Mbeki
   has pointedly not excluded the possibility of running for a third term
   as ANC president, especially if he feels that he has to block a
   successor on whom he is not keen--such as Mr Zuma.

   However, other candidates might yet emerge. Tokyo Sexwale, a prominent
   businessman and a former political prisoner, like Nelson Mandela, on
   Robben Island, has said that he would take the job if asked by the
   party. But he may have been out of the ANC's top echelons for too long
   to make it. Cyril Ramaphosa is another possibility. A former trade
   unionist turned businessman with an established international profile,
   he is still part of the party's top leadership and very popular. But
   he has kept very quiet lately and no one knows whether he really wants
   the job. Kgalema Motlanthe, the ANC's secretary-general, has also been
   touted as a possible compromise candidate.

   The ANC has once again demonstrated its ability to keep itself
   together. But as the party edges closer to December, when real
   decisions on policies and leaders will have to be made, the
   disagreements may well heat up again. And the stakes will be that much
   higher.

