
   Illicit drugs flow in from all over and then flow out to Europe


   A FAIRLY typical recent morning at Murtala Mohammed, Lagos's main
   airport, saw four traffickers carrying cocaine, heroin or marijuana
   caught, arrested and X-rayed before noon. All but one of them lived
   abroad, in Belgium, India and Spain. Stuck without money or just
   looking for more, they had agreed to swallow the stuff or slip it into
   their luggage. Since the beginning of the year, Nigeria's Drug Law
   Enforcement Agency has made 234 similar arrests at this Lagos airport.
   But this, according to the agency's director-general, Lanre Ipinmisho,
   is just grazing the surface of the country's booming drug trade.

   West Africa is the newest centre for trafficking drugs into Europe.
   European demand for cocaine and heroin is rising fast and dealers,
   faced with intense scrutiny on familiar import routes, have been
   obliged to find new ones. Cocaine from the Andes is arriving at west
   Africa's ports, airports and border crossings. Heroin from Afghanistan
   is coming in too.

   Nigeria is not the only victim of the growing trade. Guinea-Bissau, a
   small country emerging from civil war and a string of coups, has seen
   its tiny export economy overrun by illegal drugs. But as the economic
   hub of west Africa, Nigeria has, inevitably, also become its
   drug-trafficking hub. Last year 44% of the west African
   drug-traffickers arrested in Europe were Nigerian (compared with 3%
   from Guinea-Bissau). Drugs have been trickling across Nigeria's
   borders since the 1980s, but over the past few years the trickle has
   become a torrent.

   Nigeria's history of fighting the scourge is not the sort to
   discourage dealers. Its drug agency, founded in 1990, was immediately
   immersed in scandal when its own top people were themselves found to
   be involved in trafficking. At the end of October the country's
   independent commission on corrupt practices called in the agency's
   former chairman and eight other officials for questioning over money
   and drugs missing from an exhibit.

   Organised criminals have also got into the business. The country's
   anti-graft body, the Economic and Financial Crimes Commission, says it
   often stumbles upon drugs during money-laundering raids. The most
   powerful crime syndicates are involved, says Lamorde Ibrahim, the
   commission's director of operations in Lagos. A six-person group from
   his office and the drug-enforcement agency work incognito, unknown
   even to colleagues.

   The network of gangs and dealers means that drugs are increasingly
   available on Nigeria's streets. At the Lagos State Rehab and
   Vocational Training Centre former junkies tell stories of taking to
   drugs while at university, or jobless, or under pressure from the
   city's notorious gangs of "area boys". Enough cannabis to roll one
   cigarette can be found on the streets for as little as 20 naira (about
   15 cents). The UN's drugs office estimates that heroin and cocaine
   cost slightly more, at 20 to 50 naira and 80 to 100 naira a pinch.

   Reform of the drug agency may have begun to be serious. Pointing to a
   change, Mr Ipinmisho says that traffickers are often confused by their
   arrest, having been promised safe passage through the airport by
   junior officers, who can now no longer sneak them through. The
   intentions may be better, but the agency still complains of its lack
   of equipment and manpower.

   Nigeria is the only west African country on America's list of major
   drug-producing and transit countries. It is concerned enough to have
   sent Tom Schweich, the State Department's international drugs man, to
   Nigeria last month. He promised to supply the latest body-cavity X-ray
   machines to four of Nigeria's international airports. New technology
   like this will be installed first at the airports and then, more
   slowly, at ports and land borders. Not too slowly, Nigerians hope.
   Their country is already notorious for corruption and financial crime;
   the last thing it needs is narcotics too.

