
   Was there a deal between Turkey and America?

   AS IF Iraq did not have enough problems of its own. On December 16th
   Turkish aircraft bombed what they said were Kurdish rebel positions
   deep inside northern Iraq. It was one of the biggest cross-border air
   strikes in recent years and was followed by an incursion by about 300
   Turkish troops. They were said to be lightly armed, and advanced only
   3km (1.9 miles) into Iraq. But the two actions mark a big escalation
   of the traditional hostilities.

   The Turks' targets were Kurdish fighters of the Kurdistan Workers'
   Party (PKK), who have used bases inside the semi-autonomous Kurdish
   enclave in northern Iraq to launch raids into Turkey. Although Iraq's
   American occupiers have worked hard in recent months to prevent such a
   raid, Turkey's most senior general said that the Americans had not
   only agreed to the air strikes but had also provided the necessary
   intelligence.

   If this is true, it may be the result of a delicate balancing act. The
   Kurdish enclave in the north is the most successful part of
   post-Saddam Iraq. The Americans do not want it to be destabilised. But
   they also want to salvage relations with Turkey, a vital NATO ally
   whose people have become strongly anti-American since America invaded
   Iraq in 2003.

   Many Iraqi Kurds do not believe Turkey's claim that it is motivated
   only by the raids of PKK fighters. They fear that Turkey's real aim is
   to prevent the Kurdish areas of Iraq from gaining full independence,
   which would stoke up an appetite for secession among Turkey's own
   Kurdish population. The head of Iraq's Kurdish regional government
   refused to meet the visiting American secretary of state, Condoleezza
   Rice, as "a sign of protest" against American acceptance of the
   Turkish raids.

   It may well be that America and Turkey have struck a deal. In exchange
   for American support for the limited Turkish raids, and a promise to
   order the Iraqi Kurds to take action against the PKK, Turkey's prime
   minister, Recep Tayyip Erdogan, is thought to have made his own
   promises to George Bush. These include recognising the Kurds' regional
   government in Iraq and introducing a more liberal amnesty for PKK
   fighters.

   A previous amnesty that pardoned only those who ratted on their
   comrades failed. Now the government may pardon all PKK fighters who
   have not been involved in violence. After more than two decades of war
   against the rebels, Turkey knows that military measures alone cannot
   fix its Kurdish problem.

