
   Political upheaval in the ruling ANC

                                                                      AFP

                                    AFP


   AFTER months of acrimony, the African National Congress (ANC) has
   elected Jacob Zuma to be its new leader. In a ballot of almost 4,000
   delegates at the national conference of South Africa's ruling party in
   the small town of Polokwane, Mr Zuma defeated the incumbent, Thabo
   Mbeki, by a wider margin than some had predicted; 2,329 votes to
   1,505. Once the result was announced, prompting mad cheers from Mr
   Zuma's followers, Mr Mbeki, visibly shaken, came on the podium with
   his rival. They embraced, to great applause, and Mr Mbeki retreated
   while Mr Zuma took his presidential seat. Mr Zuma, formerly the
   party's deputy leader, is now in prime position (though not certain)
   to succeed Mr Mbeki as the country's next president. Mr Mbeki, who has
   served two terms, has to step down as head of state in 2009.

   For a party renowned for its iron discipline, the scenes in the tents
   at Polokwane were unprecedented. Mosiuoa Lekota, the ANC's chairman
   and a supporter of Mr Mbeki, was booed and heckled from a boisterous
   floor. True to his style, Mr Mbeki delivered a dreary, technocratic
   speech that lasted for over two hours, listing the socio-economic
   achievements of the past decade. He ended by lamenting the increasing
   patronage, corruption and unprincipled politicking within the party--a
   thinly veiled swipe at his rival--and called for moral regeneration.
   But Mr Zuma's supporters broke out in songs supporting their hero as
   soon as Mr Mbeki had finished his address. They insisted on a manual
   counting of the votes, for fear that the Mbeki camp would rig the
   result.

   Mr Mbeki tried to rebut accusations that he does not tolerate dissent
   and has centralised power. But he failed to convince the party's rank
   and file, who strongly favour the more congenial Mr Zuma. For the
   first time in decades, the party's local branches were genuinely able
   to choose their leader; in the past he would have been selected by the
   party's top brass. A delegate from the Eastern Cape, Mr Mbeki's
   homeland, argued that change was needed. She complained that public
   services were still dismal in the rural part of the province where she
   lives. Another delegate, from the Free State, argued that Mr
   Mbeki--who has been at the helm of the party for almost a decade--had
   been in charge for too long already.

   Yet despite this victory, Mr Zuma is by no means assured of the
   national presidency in 2009. For a start, his past could return to
   haunt him. He was acquitted of rape last year, but the National
   Prosecuting Authority, after years of investigation, could well charge
   him for corruption again. His supporters dismiss his legal problems as
   a political conspiracy, but Mr Zuma would have to resign if convicted.
   In that case, Kgalema Motlanthe, the party's secretary-general, who
   has been elected as the party's number two, could take over.

   Whatever happens, the relationship between the government, dominated
   by Mr Mbeki's faithful, and an ANC led by Mr Zuma will be awkward. The
   next few months could see either a patching-up of the rift over the
   succession or a purge inside the party of Mbeki loyalists. There are
   even questions over whether Mr Mbeki will finish his full term as the
   country's president, although Mr Zuma has said that he sees no reason
   for his early departure.

