
   Jobs and corruption are the issues in a close-fought contest to be
   president 

                                                                  Reuters

                                  Reuters

   EVEN by the colourful standards of African politicians, Raila Odinga
   stands out. The son of Kenya's first vice-president, Oginga Odinga, Mr
   Odinga was educated in East Germany and spent six years in solitary
   confinement for his alleged involvement in a 1982 coup that failed to
   topple the president of the day, Daniel arap Moi. Later, Mr Odinga was
   rehabilitated. Enriched by his family's molasses business, he helped
   to defeat Mr Moi in the presidential election of 2002, this time by
   throwing his support behind a coalition led by Mwai Kibaki. Now he is
   campaigning to topple Mr Kibaki and become president himself in the
   election due on December 27th. And because the mirror of Kenyan
   politics reverses everything sooner or later, the retired Mr Moi is
   backing Mr Kibaki.

   Mr Odinga wants to build more roads and modernise Kenya's railways. He
   calls the failure to add an inch of track to the railway system since
   independence from Britain in 1963, "a strong statement about the
   mediocrity with which this country has been run". He is also keen on
   devolution. A recent visit to Wales convinced him that a Welsh-style
   assembly would work for Kenya's regions. As an ethnic Luo, Mr Odinga
   is proud of his friendship with Barack Obama, an American presidential
   candidate whose father was also Luo.

   Still, Mr Odinga makes many queasy. Bankers fret about his Marxist
   youth. Foreign diplomats suspect him of authoritarian tendencies. For
   better or worse, a victory for this ebullient German-speaker would
   certainly upset the cosy country-club politics that have characterised
   Kenya since independence. Although he is rich, he remains an outsider.

   Mr Kibaki, by contrast, is an insider. A minister since 1965, he has a
   reputation for good manners. He enjoys playing golf and reads P.G.
   Wodehouse novels. Despite these gentle pursuits, his health is a
   worry. Some say he is unable to work hard; he occasionally nods off
   while conducting important government business. He rejected a call by
   Mr Odinga for a televised presidential debate. That said, he has
   performed gamely on the campaign trail. He opposes devolution. He has
   the solid backing of the Catholic church and of Kenya's business
   class. Under his presidency, the country is better educated, less
   authoritarian, more prosperous and better connected to the world
   (notably China) than it has ever been.

   On December 18th, in the last test of opinion before the election,
   Steadman, a local polling firm, put Mr Odinga at 45%, against 43% for
   Mr Kibaki and 10% for Kalonzo Musyoka, a former foreign minister and
   born-again Christian who has designs on winning a future presidential
   election. If those numbers hold, Mr Odinga's Orange Democratic
   Movement should also do well in the parliamentary elections, ahead of
   Mr Kibaki's umbrella Party of National Unity. A further threat to Mr
   Kibaki is that he may not achieve the mandatory 25% in five of the
   country's eight provinces, which would disqualify him. He is already
   known to be doing badly in Western, Coast and North-Eastern provinces,
   where he is having to do more campaigning than he wants.

   If Mr Kibaki does lose, it will be because he has not created enough
   jobs. Despite an overvalued Kenyan shilling, tourism and agriculture
   are booming. The economy is growing at about 6% a year, a record. But
   Mr Kibaki has not fulfilled his dream of turning Kenya into an
   industrialised country.

   He may also be punished for his failure to tackle egregious
   corruption, a central pledge from his 2002 victory. His own appointee
   in charge of ethics in the government, John Githongo, was bullied into
   exile after uncovering massive fraud within the government. Mr
   Githongo says that the president first ignored and then "flat-out
   opposed me". Under intense pressure from donors Mr Kibaki removed two
   ministers accused of corruption, only to reappoint them a few months
   later. But there is little expectation that Mr Odinga would do much
   better in this respect. Only Mr Musyoka has set a leader's example by
   making his assets and income public.

   In many ways, the young hold the key. Mr Odinga has a massive lead
   among twenty-somethings. If they bother to vote, change is certain.
   The integrity of the voting process will be tested to breaking point.
   Screaming mobs, mostly of jobless young men, will surely use any
   irregularities to make trouble. Kenyans hope that a fiercely fought
   election will forge a truer democracy, not cause more bloodshed.

