
   No one, it seems, can stop Somalia's capital from imploding again

                                                                      AFP

                                    AFP


   THE surgeons in the Medina hospital in Mogadishu are used to dressing
   gunshot wounds, but they had seen nothing as intense as last week's
   fighting. Islamist insurgents exchanged small-arms and artillery fire
   with Ethiopian and government troops, killing up to 400 people, most
   of them civilians. Casualties piled up in the hospital's corridors and
   corpses rotted in the sandy streets beyond, unclaimed until a lull in
   the fighting allowed for shallow graves to be dug where people fell.

   Somalia's capital, it seems, is in danger of slipping back into a
   state of bloody anarchy. About 47,000 people have fled the city during
   the fighting and more have been queuing up to leave, by minibus,
   donkey or on foot. And all this comes only three months after the
   Ethiopian-backed government had supposedly claimed back control of the
   city from the Islamist militias that they said they had defeated in a
   swift campaign last December.

   Now the picture looks very different. Remnants of the Islamist
   fighters have regrouped. Together with disaffected fighters from the
   powerful Hawiye clan, which is used to controlling much of the
   capital, they threaten a proper insurgency.

   Furthermore, as many had predicted, the continuing presence of
   Ethiopian soldiers in the capital is exacerbating the conflict.
   Indeed, far from leaving, as they had started to do, the Ethiopians
   have called for reinforcements. Not that this is entirely their fault.
   The African Union (AU) had promised to fly in 8,000 peacekeeping
   troops to replace the Ethiopians to enforce a fragile ceasefire, but
   only 1,200 or so Ugandans have actually arrived in Mogadishu, where
   they have been restricted to protecting the airport and other
   installations. Nigeria and others have promised troops but not yet
   sent them.

   That has left the Ethiopians to do most of the fighting on behalf of
   the government, with covert assistance from America. Ethiopian
   soldiers had done a mostly impressive job of policing Mogadishu with
   little incident for three months. But they are seen as invaders by
   most Somalis and will remain unpopular, and thus targets, whatever
   they do. The same goes for the Americans. They have backed the
   government and the Ethiopians as a way of rooting out suspected
   al-Qaeda men who had operated on the fringes of the Union of Islamic
   Courts, the Somali Islamists whose brief reign had brought a modicum
   of order until they were pushed out.

   A further complication is the Eritrean backing of the ousted Islamist
   militias. Eritrea has supplied arms to them and might be doing so
   again. Yoweri Museveni, Uganda's president, visited Eritrea this week
   to ask it not to get involved, but was rebuffed. Eritrea sees the
   mayhem in Somalia as a chance to make life as hard as possible for its
   Ethiopian neighbour and mortal enemy. Eritrea says it opposes "any
   foreign involvement" in Somalia--except, of course, its own.

   The international contact group on Somalia, a body set up to try to
   resolve the Somali crisis, including representatives from America and
   the European Union, held talks in Egypt this week but produced little
   new. Somalia's government was urged again to reach out to moderate
   Islamists, but nobody knows what to do about the remaining Islamist
   fighters, who seem intent on jihad. Some diplomats in the region think
   it inevitable that, despairing of any solution, the outside world will
   just cast Somalia adrift. Many in Mogadishu think that their city
   already has been.

   What more could be done? A properly enforced arms embargo may have a
   calming effect. But the immediate challenge is to prevent Mogadishu
   sliding back into a war economy, where men with guns profit from
   instability. The signs are not good. Food prices are up by 50%.
   Extortion at gunpoint is back.

   More importantly, deals will have to be done with the Hawiye clan
   elders to try to detach them from the Islamist fighters, thus reducing
   the opposition to the government. The Union of Islamic Courts made
   themselves popular with people in Mogadishu last year by imposing
   enough order to allow people to get on with their normal business
   again. Now, for instance, the Hawiye traders complain of a threefold
   increase in duty applied to staple goods arriving at Mogadishu's port.
   Settling issues like this could make the Hawiye leaders, and the
   gunmen they control, readier to negotiate.

   If that were to happen, there may be a small chance of an
   accommodation between the Hawiye and the government. The alternative
   is dire. It took 15 years and 14 attempts to deliver Somalia the
   relative peace that the country enjoyed in the first three months of
   this year. If the country fails again, it could stay failed for a very
   long time.

