
   Elections could further destabilise the violent, oil-rich Delta region


   THE seedy drinking-holes frequented by burly foreign oilmen in
   Nigeria's main oil city of Port Harcourt are pretty empty these days.
   Kidnappings and killings of expatriate workers, car-bombs and violent
   robberies have persuaded many to stay behind the high walls and barbed
   wire of their own homes, as armed groups wreak havoc ahead of national
   elections next month.

   In the past year, attacks on oil facilities have forced Nigeria to
   shut down a fifth of its production; over 100 foreign workers have
   been kidnapped in the oil-producing Niger Delta region. Higher
   security costs and a shrinking number of expatriates willing to take
   the risks of working there have sharply slowed new investment. The
   Nigerian government has lost billions of dollars in oil revenues. Now
   the multinational oil companies, such as Royal Dutch Shell, that
   operate in Africa's biggest oil producer are bracing themselves for
   more trouble. The omens are not good; in the run-up to the elections
   in 2003, violence in the Delta forced Nigeria to shut down 40% of its
   oil capacity.

   Trouble in the region is not a new phenomenon, but it has escalated in
   the past year or so. For years, impoverished communities in the
   tropical swamplands of the Delta protested against exploitation of
   their lands by oil companies, only to be suppressed by the army.
   Things got worse under civilian rule in the late 1990s, when
   politicians armed local thugs to rig elections for them. After the
   2003 elections, many of these bully-boys used their guns in
   territorial squabbles in the mangrove creeks. But they also began to
   espouse a radical political rhetoric as well, demanding a greater
   share of the oil-wealth for their local communities. In the cities,
   criminal gangs, born from secretive university fraternities, were
   armed in a similar way.

   Militant cells and gang leaders are engaged in a variety of criminal
   enterprises, building up arsenals of weapons with the proceeds and
   sometimes working with corrupt army officials. The theft of crude oil
   from sophisticated oil pipelines and wells (known as "bunkering") has
   become a multi-million-dollar industry. Worryingly, the Movement for
   the Emancipation of the Niger Delta (MEND), the mysterious group
   responsible for the most troubling attacks on the oil industry last
   year, has been trying to bridge the gap between militants in the
   creeks, with their machine-guns and rocket-launchers, and the criminal
   gangs in the cities, armed with lighter Kalashnikov rifles.

   On January 28th MEND stormed a police complex in Port Harcourt,
   freeing 125 criminals, including Soboma George, an influential gang
   leader who had once been used to help rig state elections for the
   ruling party. MEND's anonymous leader and spokesman boasts that he has
   "the oil industry by the balls". On March 15th, after releasing its
   latest two hostages, presumably for a nice ransom, MEND promised to
   step up its attacks.

   But many groups falling under the broad banner of MEND have local
   agendas and a variety of paymasters. Some have been enraged by the
   choice of gubernatorial candidates put up by the ruling People's
   Democratic Party (PDP) which may well cheat, rig and bribe its way
   into hanging onto power in the Delta State Houses in April's
   elections. The richest oil-producing states have revenues of up to
   $1.3 billion a year but dismal records in providing basic services,
   since officials loot most of the money. The fear is that militants
   could work alone or with MEND to disrupt elections in the Delta states
   and launch attacks on the oil industry as a way of holding the PDP
   state and federal governments to ransom. "Either bodies are going to
   pile up or we are going to see an oil shock, or both," says an
   oil-industry security official.

   The PDP candidate for president, Umaru Yar'Adua, a northern state
   governor, says that by picking as his running-mate Goodluck Jonathan,
   from the Delta's majority tribe, the Ijaw, he will be able to tackle
   the region's problems. Should he become vice-president, Mr Jonathan
   will be under pressure to deliver quick results to his people if he
   wants to stave off yet more violence and unrest in his land.

