
   A new bill is supposed to give black Zimbabweans more economic power


   DOING any business at all in Zimbabwe is no mean feat these days.
   Sky-rocketing inflation-- officially estimated at 7,600% in July but
   probably over 10,000%--unemployment at 80% and crippling power and
   fuel shortages are daunting enough. On top of that, price controls
   slapped on in June have emptied shelves and depleted stocks, bringing
   many shops and factories to a standstill. The official exchange rate
   was devalued last week from 250 to 30,000 Zimbabwean dollars to the
   American one. But this new rate is still at least eight times less
   than what you can get on the black market. Now, following the land
   redistribution that has devastated agriculture, President Robert
   Mugabe's government seems to have declared open season on other parts
   of the economy as well.

   In the next few weeks, Parliament looks set to pass the Indigenisation
   and Economic Empowerment Bill that might ultimately transfer at least
   51% of all businesses into local black hands. This is in addition to a
   law which already reserves 60% of most listed companies to local
   blacks. Zimbabwe's government is not the only one in the region trying
   to involve more blacks in the economy, none more so than South Africa
   with its "black economic empowerment" programme. But Zimbabwe's is
   probably the only one so far to declare, in effect, that whites or
   foreigners should not own more than half of a company. The bill
   defines indigenous as "any person who before the 18th April 1980
   [Zimbabwe's Independence Day] was disadvantaged by unfair
   discrimination on the grounds of his or her race, and any descendant
   of such person."

   In any event, Zimbabwe's bill contains a lot of ambiguity, and gives a
   lot of loosely-defined discretion to the government. It is unclear
   whether the transfer would apply only to future mergers, demergers,
   restructurings and transfers, or to all existing companies. Moreover,
   the minister for indigenisation and empowerment would have to approve
   all ownership transfers and would have the power to impose alternative
   local partners if he disapproves of those involved in the proposed
   transactions. He would also have the authority to exempt selected
   companies from the ownership requirements for a certain period. Though
   the bill says little about compensation, there is a proposal for a
   fund that would help Zimbabweans finance their acquisitions through,
   among other things, a company levy. So businesses may end up paying
   for their own change of ownership.

   In the past, similar threats to indigenise parts of the economy have
   come to nothing, so there is still a chance the bill will be quietly
   buried. However, its appearance now is hardly likely to delight new
   investors. For example Orascom Telecom, a mobile-phone group based in
   Egypt, is already fighting to protect its investments in Zimbabwe. It
   owns 60% of Telecel, a local operator whose licence the government
   threatened to cancel unless Orascom reduced its ownership to 49%.

   Other companies are trying to head off the threat by taking the
   initiative. Old Mutual, a financial institution with roots in South
   Africa, has just said it would sell 20% of its Zimbabwean operation to
   local staff, though it maintains this has nothing to do with the bill.
   Edcon, one of South Africa's biggest retailers, donated part of its
   business in Zimbabwe to local staff a few years ago, bringing its
   share down to 40%.

   South Africa's Standard Bank and Britain's Barclays, which own all or
   a majority of their Zimbabwean subsidiaries, are taking a wait-and-see
   approach. But Heinz, a food giant involved in Zimbabwe since the
   1980s, announced last week that it had sold its 51% stake in Olivine,
   a company dealing in cooking oil, margarine and soap, to the
   government. It will leave Zimbabwe altogether. Most investors,
   however, are hoping to hang on until Zimbabwe turns the corner and
   starts rebuilding its once flourishing economy.

   On the other hand, the country's economic crisis is also attracting
   investors keen to pick up cheap assets. But they need a big appetite
   for risk. Earlier this year, Lonrho, a conglomerate with a long
   history of trading in Africa, announced the creation of a Zimbabwean
   subsidiary that would primarily invest in property, infrastructure and
   hotels. LonZim has already raised over £32m ($66.2m) and is expected
   to list in London shortly to bring in more cash.

   Imara, a financial company focusing on Africa, opened a fund investing
   in Zimbabwean firms in April. But the money poured in faster than it
   could invest, and it had to stop taking new money for a month in May.
   The fund has now invested $12-13m mainly in companies listed on the
   local stock exchange--a novel form of disaster investment.

