
   Refugees are returning to Baghdad, but not always for encouraging
   reasons

                                                                      AFP
                                                                      AFP

                                                     A magic bus for some


   IT WAS a stirring sight. A score of buses piled with luggage and
   decked with Iraqi flags set out from Damascus on November 27th,
   carrying hundreds of Iraqi refugees for the overnight journey to
   Baghdad. The Iraqi government, which paid for the convoy, says there
   will be many more. Improved security in the capital brought about by
   the "surge" of American troops, it claims, has prompted a mass
   homecoming of Iraqis who fled the sectarian death-squads that once
   terrorised the city.

   According to the Iraqi Red Crescent, a sister body of the
   International Red Cross, some 25,000 Iraqis returned from Syria alone
   between mid-September and the end of last month. Others say the number
   is closer to 60,000. But this is only a fraction of the more than 2m
   Iraqis estimated to have fled abroad in the past four years. Moreover,
   it is unclear whether everyone is returning for the best of reasons.

   By virtually every account, Baghdad is much safer than it was a few
   months ago. Estimates of civilian casualties are incomplete, but one
   independent tally suggests that the national death toll has dropped by
   over 50% since the summer, and the capital has seen some of the most
   dramatic improvements. Baghdadis who a few months ago were hunkered
   down in their houses say that they are now travelling across town to
   work and dining out at night. Women have abandoned the heavy robes
   urged on them by religiously zealous militias for a simple headscarf
   and jeans. Young men are taking down the makeshift barricades that
   used to seal off streets from car-bombers or raiders.

   But this is not necessarily the reason why Iraqis are returning.
   Neighbours such as Syria, which originally welcomed Iraqis, have found
   themselves overwhelmed and are now starting to cut off services. Few
   of the refugees have been able to find enough work to support
   themselves in exile. Some have simply run out of money.

   Most of the host countries seem unwilling to risk the international
   opprobrium that would accompany rounding up Iraqis and sending them
   back to a war zone. Instead, they find other ways to make it
   unpleasant to stay. According to a report released by Human Rights
   Watch, a lobby group, desperate Iraqis who have fled from Syria to its
   more prosperous neighbour, Lebanon, are often caught by the
   authorities and offered a stark choice: opt for home "voluntarily" or
   rot in prison indefinitely. Iraqis in Egypt who want to renew valid
   visas claim they are met by sneering officials who tell them they are
   not wanted any more and demand extortionate fees to process their
   papers.

   Moreover, the return of the refugees yields its own set of problems.
   Many will find their homes are now occupied by others. American
   military officers complain that the Iraqi government is not prepared
   for this looming crisis. The Red Crescent fears the refugees who
   return will simply join the ranks of the 2m-plus internally displaced
   Iraqis it estimates are scattered across the country.

   Still, the return of the refugees fits into a general weariness with
   sectarian hatred. One member of the Mahdi Army, who spent the last
   year securing his neighbourhood from Sunni insurgents by chasing away
   any Sunni who might sympathise with them, now says he is contacting
   his former neighbours and offering them pledges of safety if they
   return. This fragile goodwill may dissipate, though, if the government
   does not apply itself to finding homes for its displaced citizens.

