
   The court names its first two people suspected of atrocities in Darfur


   IN THE village of Arawala, West Darfur, the women were lined up,
   stripped naked and tied to trees with their legs apart. Throughout the
   night, the men of the janjaweed, the Sudanese government-backed Arab
   militia, repeatedly raped them. One woman said she was raped by
   between ten and 25 men. The soldiers later burnt the village to ash,
   killing many of its 7,000 inhabitants and forcing the rest to flee.

   In the town of Mukjar, also in West Darfur, a witness said she saw her
   uncle in a makeshift prison after he had been rounded up with other
   townsmen by the janjaweed and members of the Sudanese armed forces. He
   was suspended in mid-air, his arms bound to a plank in the ceiling,
   his legs tied wide apart over a burning stove. Some 60 others,
   restrained in different ways, were in the same room. All had whip
   marks on their bodies, and their clothes were bloodstained and torn.
   One had had his finger- and toenails pulled out.

   It is for atrocities such as these that Luis Moreno-Ocampo, chief
   prosecutor of the International Criminal Court (ICC) in The Hague, has
   asked the court's pre-trial chamber to issue summonses against two
   men: Ahmad Muhammad Harun, a former junior interior minister in the
   Sudanese government and head of its Darfur security desk and now,
   astonishingly, minister for humanitarian affairs; and Ali Muhammad Ali
   Abd-al-Rahman, better known by his nom de guerre, Ali Kushayb, a
   leader of the janjaweed. Evidence against other suspects, perhaps even
   more senior, is likely to be presented later.

   More than 200,000 people are reckoned to have been killed and some
   2.5m others driven from their homes in Sudan's westernmost province
   since fighting began in February 2003, when black African tribesmen
   took up arms, complaining of decades of neglect and discrimination by
   the Arab-dominated government in Khartoum. In the past month alone,
   some 46,000 more have fled from their villages in an attempt to escape
   the slaughter, rape and destruction by the janjaweed and Sudanese
   government forces.

   Making it all stick

   Mr Moreno-Ocampo's presentation on February 27th of 94 pages of
   evidence, meticulously compiled under very difficult circumstances
   over the past 20 months, provoked predictable outrage in Khartoum.
   "All the evidence the prosecutor referred to is lies," said Mohamed
   Ali al-Mardi, Sudan's justice minister. Ever since the UN Security
   Council passed a resolution in March 2005 asking the ICC to
   investigate the situation in Darfur, Omar al-Bashir, Sudan's
   president, has repeatedly sworn never to hand over any Sudanese
   citizen indicted by the court. His own government was perfectly "able
   and willing" to try the perpetrators itself. Indeed, it had set up a
   special criminal court in 2005 to do just that. As a tribunal of last
   resort, the international court had no jurisdiction.

   Mr Moreno-Ocampo always knew that admissibility would pose a problem:
   the ICC cannot prosecute people who are already being investigated or
   charged in another jurisdiction, for example in their home country.
   But after five visits to Sudan for talks with government and judicial
   officials, he is sure they are not investigating the same people (in
   regard to Mr Harun) or the same crimes (re Mr Kushayb), so his case
   against the pair should be admissible. It will now be up to the ICC's
   pre-trial chamber to decide whether he is right. It will also have to
   decide whether there are "reasonable grounds" to arraign the two.

   There are, says Mr Moreno-Ocampo. Though his investigators could not
   get into Darfur, they screened some 600 potential witnesses during 70
   missions to 17 countries, taking formal statements from about 100 of
   them. He says he has a "very strong case" demonstrating the criminal
   responsibility of Messrs Harun and Kushayb in relation to 51 counts of
   alleged crimes against humanity and war crimes, including murder,
   torture, persecution and mass rape carried out against Darfur's
   civilians in 2003 and 2004. He makes no reference to America's
   allegation of genocide.

   Mr Moreno-Ocampo's continuing investigations cover the whole period up
   to the present day. He refuses to divulge whether or when other
   suspects may be named, saying he will go wherever the evidence leads
   him. For his first case, he has targeted a chief planner and a primary
   implementer of the worst atrocities. Their testimony could prove vital
   in helping him reach those responsible higher up the chain of command.
   Human-rights lobbies are urging him to go to the top--to Mr Bashir
   himself. But this would complicate an already complex situation.

   Western diplomats are already worried about the impact of the ICC on
   efforts to get UN troops into Darfur. An agreement on a proposed
   hybrid UN-African Union force is not even close yet. Under the terms
   of the UN Security Council resolution on Darfur, Sudan is obliged to
   co-operate with the court. If it refuses, it could face sanctions or
   other measures. Meanwhile, the raping and killing in Darfur goes on.

