
   Syria is finding it hard to cope with the flood of refugees from Iraq

                                                                  Reuters
                                                                  Reuters

                                                       Damascene survival


   "DO YOU have a job?" and "What are you doing at the moment?" are
   leading questions on the whiteboard in an English lesson at an Iraqi
   refugee community centre in Sayyida Zaynab, a suburb on the edge of
   Syria's capital, Damascus. The students can expect more such requests
   for personal data in the coming weeks as the Syrian government and the
   UN carry out a census to count those who have fled from neighbouring
   Iraq.

   Syria has taken in the lion's share of Iraq's refugees, about 1.5m of
   them, of whom well over half are probably Sunni, some 15% Shia and
   maybe 10% Christian. Jordan is thought to account for another 600,000
   or so, but no one knows exactly. The Syrian survey will assess the
   needs of the refugees--and their effect on the host country, which has
   19m of its own citizens. Many refugees are running out of savings,
   slipping into poverty, sometimes into crime and prostitution.

   The count will be difficult. If they were all in camps, it would be
   easier, says Kristele Younes of Refugees International. "It's the
   first time in the UN's history that there's been an urban crisis of
   such huge proportions," she says. "They are people who are very
   difficult to `see'. They speak Arabic and look pretty similar [to
   Syrians]. It's almost a ghost population."

   In Sayyida Zaynab, near a Shia shrine to Zaynab, the Prophet
   Muhammad's granddaughter, the streets teem with Iraqis. Shops have
   been taken over by Iraqis, restaurants such as the Bakery Bagdady
   [sic] sell Iraqi specialities unknown to Syrians, and travel agents
   offer trips to the border for 500 Syrian pounds ($10). Some 350,000
   Iraqis may have moved into this area alone, putting a strain on water
   and electricity supplies as well as on schools.

   The Syrian Arab Red Crescent, together with the Office of the UN High
   Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR), has opened a clinic to cope with
   the influx of sick Iraqis. Inside, the waiting area is packed. Dr
   Akram al-Hasani, a Syrian orthopaedic surgeon, is examining a Basra
   man still suffering from an arm wound after being shot four years ago.
   "We have many trauma victims," he says. "And a large proportion of
   children with congenital problems, more than among Syrians."

   In the mainly Christian district of Jaramana, a clinic at the Deir
   Ibrahim Khalil convent has an equally wide range of problems.
   "Depression, depression, depression," says Sister Malekeh, a Greek
   Catholic nun. "It's very sad. Now we have a psychiatrist who started
   two months ago. Before they didn't accept it and wouldn't come to the
   clinic, but now they have started to come."

   In a census in 1987, there were said to be 1.4m Christians in Iraq. In
   the 1990s, the figure shrank to 1m or so. After Saddam Hussein's
   demise, they began to be targeted, mainly by Sunni groups linked to
   al-Qaeda, so most have now fled. An Anglican churchman says that some
   1.25m Iraqi Christians now live outside Iraq, with about 250,000 left
   behind.

   International aid workers are queuing up to work in Syria, to relieve
   the burden on the UN agencies and on the Red Crescent. Eight
   charities, including Islamic Relief and the Norwegian and Danish
   Refugee Councils, have been negotiating for months to start projects.
   The foreign ministry has given its approval, but they must work under
   the umbrella of the local Red Crescent, which has been slow to reach
   agreement with the various groups. The Ministry for Social Affairs and
   Labour, which oversees local NGOs, says that Syrian ones should work
   mainly for Syrians.

   Moreover, Syrian attitudes to Iraqis are hardening, as the numbers
   overwhelm local services. The government also worries about the cost
   of providing the extra population with heavily subsidised bread, fuel
   and other goods.

   The UNHCR has managed to register only 135,000 refugees, a fraction of
   those who have arrived. And they are still trickling in, despite new
   rules that have in effect closed the border. Only certain favoured
   categories of applicants, such as lorry drivers, businessmen,
   academics and engineers, are now being allowed in, with occasional
   exceptions for the sick.

