
   The official opposition picks its leader for a pretty thankless task


   SHE is almost certain never to become South Africa's president. It is
   virtually unthinkable that her party, the Democratic Alliance (DA),
   would ever push the ruling African National Congress (ANC) out of
   power. But South Africa badly needs a vigorous opposition to keep the
   ANC on its toes, call it to account, pick holes in some of its
   policies, and offer people alternative ideas if not the likelihood of
   an alternative party in power. For sure, the looming race within the
   ANC to succeed President Thabo Mbeki, who must bow out in 2009, is far
   more important. But the election on May 6th of Helen Zille as leader
   of the DA, to succeed Tony Leon, is a notable event. It is vital for
   the well-being of South African democracy that she makes her mark.

                                                                      AFP
                                                                      AFP

                                             Zille salutes her supporters

   After 13 years as leader of what has become South Africa's main
   opposition, Mr Leon voluntarily stepped down, enabling Ms Zille, an
   energetic mayor of Cape Town, easily to defeat two rivals for the DA's
   top job. Her supporters ululated and blew horns, dancing and singing
   re ya lewena (we are going with you). Mr Leon left the stage with
   cheers, fireworks and kwaito, a South African version of hip hop.

   He has done a good job, so far as it goes. Since 1994, what is now the
   DA has evolved through several changes and alliances. At its core is
   the old Progressive Party, whose leonine survivor, Helen Suzman, was
   for years the sole liberal opponent of government in the all-white
   apartheid-era Parliament. Competing in 1994 as the Democratic Party
   under Mr Leon, it got a paltry 1.7% of the vote. In the last general
   election, in 2004, as the Democratic Alliance, it got 12.4%. In local
   elections last year it got nearly 15%, and it now heads a coalition
   that runs Cape Town.

   The cheeky chappie goes

   Unlike many in the ANC, who think that national unity requires
   consensus politics, Mr Leon, a clever, bouncy lawyer, believes
   democracy must be adversarial. He refused a cabinet post in Nelson
   Mandela's government of national unity. The ANC has generally detested
   Mr Leon as confrontational, abrasive and arrogant. For his part, as an
   outspoken social and economic liberal, he castigates the ANC
   for--among other things--its authoritarian and centralising
   tendencies. He has also accused it of racism, including making snide
   remarks about his Jewishness.

   The DA's biggest failure under Mr Leon has been its inability to win
   votes from black South Africans, who make up 80% of the population and
   still overwhelmingly support the ANC; the large bulk of DA votes comes
   from whites and Coloureds (South Africans of mixed race), who each
   represent about 9% of the population. The DA is reckoned to get less
   than 2% of the black vote. Unless it breaks into new territory, it
   will stay on the fringe of South African politics, despite being the
   official opposition in Parliament.

   Last week's DA congress included a fair number of black and Coloured
   delegates, but its top leadership remains predominantly white. In 2005
   most of the DA's black MPs defected to the ANC. Ms Zille, whose
   parents were refugees from Nazi Germany and who herself was a notable
   anti-apartheid journalist and campaigner, will find it hard to make
   inroads into the black vote.

   Her best hope of boosting the DA is to run Cape Town better than the
   ANC runs other big cities, and to show that her party cares for the
   poor and understands the concerns of black voters. If the DA does well
   in Cape Town, it might have a chance of winning Western Cape province
   in the next general election, in 2009. So far Ms Zille has handled
   Cape Town's fragile ruling coalition well and has begun cleaning up
   the city's management. She says she wants to keep both jobs, as mayor
   of Cape Town and running the DA: a hard task.

   In her acceptance speech, Ms Zille signalled her desire to appeal to
   all by speaking in English, in Afrikaans (spoken by whites of mainly
   Dutch descent and by many Coloureds) and in Xhosa, one of the
   country's most widely spoken African languages. She said she wanted to
   build bridges between South Africa's many cultures, and even urged
   everyone in the hall to start learning an extra South African
   language. She said that "black economic empowerment", the ANC's policy
   of spreading the country's wealth more widely, "must include ordinary
   people, not just a small, politically connected elite".

   Sipho Masigo, a young DA city councillor who canvasses Johannesburg's
   largest township looking for recruits, admits it is not easy. He
   joined the DA in 2003, frustrated by the inaction of the ANC
   councillor in charge of the slum that used to be his home. In Soweto,
   Johannesburg's biggest township, he organises training, helps people
   find ways to make ends meet and tells them that democracy needs an
   opposition, pointing at next-door Zimbabwe. People, he says, are
   warming to the idea.

   But the trouble for the DA and its new leader is that South Africa's
   many poor (measures of unemployment range from 25% to 40%) are keener
   on left-wing alternatives to the ANC than on the DA's liberal ideas.
   The ANC's real opposition is from within. The trade unions and the
   Communist Party, both still within the ruling ANC-led alliance, think
   it is too cosy with big business. One day the ANC's left may split
   off, though there is no sign of that happening soon. Meanwhile Ms
   Zille, who is able and courageous, needs to plug away at promoting her
   ideas, however limited her prospects of putting them into practice.

