
   After China and America, it is Europe's turn to woo Africa

   IT IS a coincidence, but an appropriate one nonetheless, that Europe
   should try to relaunch its relations with Africa in Lisbon. It was
   from here, in 1415, that Portuguese ships first set out to begin the
   European exploration and conquest of the dark continent; and it will
   be here on December 8th that politicians from 53 African and 27
   European countries will gather at a summit to bury the old colonial
   relationships in favour of something more modern and "equal", as the
   Europeans like to put it.

   The get-together is the idea of the Portuguese, who currently hold the
   EU presidency; they see this first EU-Africa summit since 2000 as the
   capstone of their six-month tenure. They accept that the summit
   carries a "political price": the one-man-against-the-rest EU split
   caused by the refusal of Britain's prime minister, Gordon Brown, to
   attend, in protest against the presence of Zimbabwe's president,
   Robert Mugabe. But, the Portuguese say, they had little option. China,
   and others, have forced their hand.

   For the Europeans are increasingly worried that they are losing both
   trade and clout on a continent that they used to regard as their own
   backyard. Over the past five years Europe has watched with a mixture
   of shock and awe as resource-hungry China has swept across a grateful
   continent, taking oil and minerals in exchange for anything the
   Africans want, be it money now, money later, ports or roads.
   African-Chinese trade has increased five-fold over that time to more
   than $50 billion last year. Europe's long-standing links mean that it
   is still Africa's biggest trading partner, but the Chinese are
   catching up fast. As a stark example of China's new muscle, in October
   the Industrial and Commercial Bank of China paid $5.6 billion for a
   20% stake in Standard Bank of South Africa--the biggest single
   investment ever made on the continent.

   And the Chinese are not the only newcomers. India has been buying up
   oil and mineral concessions in countries such as Sudan and Nigeria.
   America has revived its interest in Africa: it wants to take 25% of
   its oil supply from there to decrease its dependence on the Middle
   East. America has also been recruiting new allies, such as Mali and
   Ethiopia, in its fight against Islamist terrorism on the continent.

   All this has left Africa's leaders in the novel position of being able
   to pick their friends rather than being dictated to by others, be they
   white development economists or the IMF. And they are enjoying every
   minute of it. As Shamsudeen Usman, Nigeria's minister of finance,
   says: "Nigeria is becoming a beautiful bride. What is happening is the
   Chinese, the Koreans, everyone is coming around, and if European
   companies do not wake up, they will see that most of the best
   businesses are taken. For us, really, whoever gives the best terms,
   the best conditions, and is willing to come and invest, those are the
   ones that we'll do business with."

   Europe, used to privileged access to African markets and politics, has
   been left floundering by the new competition. Europeans complain that
   China damages Africa by not linking its loans and investments to
   improvements in government and human rights, as the worthy Europeans
   do. But Africans are dismissive: as one official says, "Europe is
   jealous. They say we have gotten a new colonial master, but our old
   one wasn't so good."

   Getting hung up on democracy

   The Lisbon summit will thus be an explicit counterpoint to the
   China-Africa summit of November 2006, when China cemented its new
   relationship with a promise of yet more money. Now the Europeans will
   try to woo the beautiful bride and her dowry of hydrocarbons back from
   Beijing. Europe's goodies will be a mix of concessions and
   inducements.

   The main concession, a nod to the Chinese, is to be less critical of
   African regimes that are a bit light-fingered, or disdainful of
   human-rights. João Cravinho, the Portuguese minister responsible for
   the summit, contends that the Europeans have been "excessively
   simplistic" in insisting on European models of government for Africa.
   Instead, Europe will in future "focus on the essence of government,
   rather than the forms, [and be] less hung-up on particular forms of
   decision-making."

   Getting into the spirit, Europe overturned its own travel ban on Mr
   Mugabe, a complete stranger to decent behaviour, to allow him to
   attend the summit, even at the expense of losing the British
   government. Mr Mugabe will be lectured on his sins--and is then free
   to join in the cuddly group photographs. This is the "political price"
   that Europe feels it has to pay for warding off the Chinese. Sudan's
   president, Omar al-Bashir, will also be at the summit, but there are
   no plans to nag him about his army's brutality in Darfur.

   Of the new inducements, trade deals called Economic Partnership
   Agreements are the ones Europe thinks will help Africa most. The EU
   argues that these are good for development, offering African countries
   full access to the European market while allowing them to keep about
   20% of their own markets closed to protect fragile domestic
   industries. But some African countries, such as South Africa and
   Nigeria, argue that they are being bullied and threatened into making
   agreements before they are ready; the EU insists all must be wrapped
   up by the end of the year. The Europeans argue that the deals are
   designed to encourage regional integration in Africa. The Africans
   retort that by making separate deals with different countries they are
   doing exactly the opposite.

   Europe's new insouciance about human rights will worry many,
   especially those suffering atrocities in Zimbabwe and Darfur, while
   the inducements hardly look tempting. Europe needs to do much better
   than this if it is to win the bride.

