
   A politician who paid the price for telling Israelis unpalatable
   truths

   ABROAD he has a reputation as a tireless peacemaker; at home he is a
   byword for political failure. When Yossi Beilin announced his decision
   to step down as head of the left-liberal Meretz party at its next
   leadership election in the spring, there were palpable sighs of relief
   not just from his rivals but also from his friends, who hope that he
   still has a chance to be remembered for his bold statesmanship instead
   of his defective leadership.

   Mr Beilin was one of the first mainstream Israeli politicians to push
   for what most Israelis now accept: the need to give the Palestinians
   an independent state. And it was largely thanks to him that serious
   peace talks first got going. In the early 1990s, when Israel was
   talking to local Palestinian leaders in an attempt to circumvent the
   exiled Yasser Arafat and his Palestine Liberation Organisation in
   Tunis, Mr Beilin argued as a youthful deputy foreign minister that
   without Arafat, whom most Israelis dismissed as an incorrigible
   terrorist, peace talks would be worthless. With the backing of Shimon
   Peres, he encouraged the secret meetings in Oslo between an Arafat
   aide and two Israeli peace activists that led eventually to the famous
   handshake between Arafat and Yitzhak Rabin on the White House lawn.

   He stuck to his views even as the peace process collapsed, the violent
   second intifada erupted and the international "road map" that followed
   it began to stall, arguing to the last that Arafat was the only
   Palestinian leader who had the standing to make peace. In 2003 he and
   a Palestinian counterpart launched another peace plan, the Geneva
   Accord, which, even with the intifada raging, won the support of some
   30% of Israelis. According to Dov Weisglass, an adviser to Ariel
   Sharon, the popularity of this unofficial "civil society" initiative
   was one factor that prompted the then prime minister to ignore the
   rage of his own Likud party and extract Israel's soldiers and settlers
   from Gaza in 2005.

   Lately Mr Beilin has courted unpopularity by speaking reluctantly of
   the need for Israel to do business, through a third party, with the
   rejectionists of Hamas now that they have deposed Arafat's old Fatah
   movement and control the Gaza Strip. His daring has long hurt his
   political career. When Palestinian suicide-bombings disheartened
   Israel's peace camp he lost his relevance to Labour, left to head
   Meretz, and ran it into the ground. His own defence, that other
   parties had appropriated Meretz's peace agenda, is only partly true;
   he neglected its other core issues such as social justice and civil
   rights. An allegedly dictatorial management style did not help.

   By contrast, Mr Peres, who had shifted from a hawk in his early days
   to a dove by the time Mr Beilin worked for him, shifted effortlessly
   back to the political centre and is now Israel's president. There is
   no question who has been the cannier politician. But Mr Beilin has
   been perhaps Israel's boldest peacenik. He will be missed, if his
   departure from the arena is permanent.

