
   A chance of a proper peace any time soon looks slim


   AN ATTEMPT at national reconciliation finally sputtered into life this
   week in Somalia's battered capital, Mogadishu. Insecurity had delayed
   proceedings several times before. The place is as dangerous as ever,
   but the transitional government sounds more determined. Somalia's
   internationally recognised but hitherto ineffective president,
   Abdullahi Yusuf, declared that "not even a nuclear bomb" would
   distract Somalia's tribal elders from their task of finding a way
   forward. But few people are betting on success.

                                                                      AFP
                                                                      AFP

                                                Come back tomorrow, maybe

   Indeed, after opening speeches on July 15th, work was promptly
   adjourned; the organisers said they needed to wait for more
   participants. But mortars landing around the bullet-riddled garage
   serving as a conference hall did not help. An insurgency led by the
   Shabab ("young men"), a hardened jihadist remnant of the militias
   loyal to the Islamic Courts Union that briefly ran most of Somalia
   until it was overthrown by an Ethiopian-led force earlier this year,
   says it will kill anyone who takes part. Somalia's authorities, backed
   by Ethiopian troops, have sealed off large parts of the city.

   Tribal elders have chattered their way through dozens of
   reconciliation meetings since Somalia's central government collapsed
   in 1991. This time there may be a slightly better chance of groping
   towards a peace deal leading to elections proposed for 2009,
   especially if the elders can agree on some relatively simple issues,
   such as policing, taxation and schools, among other things.

   The Shabab know their cause will be in jeopardy if they cannot scotch
   this latest attempt at reconciliation. Al-Qaeda, which is devoting a
   lot of rhetoric and resources to turning the Horn of Africa into a new
   battleground, is equally keen to prevent it from getting anywhere.
   Much will depend on whether Mr Yusuf and his prime minister, Mohammed
   Ghedi, can be persuaded to invite moderate Islamists and elders from
   the Hawiye clan, which predominates in Mogadishu and has been broadly
   hostile to the government.

   In its confusion and scope, there are similarities between what is
   being tried in Somalia and the setting up of the loya jirga ("grand
   assembly") to draft a new constitution in late 2003 in Afghanistan.
   The difference is that rich and powerful countries have promised
   virtually nothing towards rescuing Somalia--and Mogadishu is far more
   dangerous than Afghanistan's capital, Kabul, was three years ago,
   particularly for foreigners. Moreover, elsewhere in north-east Africa
   the mayhem in the Sudanese region of Darfur has grabbed far more
   attention in international forums.

   The African Union, too, has failed to address Somalia effectively.
   Only Uganda has so far sent peacekeepers, while other African
   countries make increasingly feeble excuses for their refusal to help
   out. Diplomats whose governments have been paying for Somalia's
   reconciliation conference are unlikely to attend, for fear of being
   blown up or shot.

   Meanwhile, many Somalis are dying of diseases worsened by malnutrition
   and drowning in overloaded smugglers' boats in large numbers as they
   seek a better life elsewhere. The economy is still a wreck. In recent
   weeks Somali businessmen have been flying back to the safety of
   Nairobi, the capital of neighbouring Kenya, along with their money.
   Mogadishu's big Bakara market has been closed for days; when it is
   open, grenades and gunfire take the fun out of shopping. And as the
   reconciliation conference fails to take off in earnest, the danger
   grows that Mogadishu will soon slide back into anarchy.

