
   The passage of a long-awaited law offers a ray of hope for
   reconciliation

                                                                       AP

                                     AP

              Can Maliki be more than just a Shia poster boy?

   FOR nearly two years, Iraqis and outsiders trying to revive their
   country have been waiting in vain for politicians in Baghdad to agree
   to a clutch of laws that might coax Iraq's feuding sects towards a
   common vision. The Americans' military "surge" was explicitly intended
   to give the politicians a breathing-space so that, as security
   improved, they could force through some necessary measures. The surge
   has worked better than expected but the politicians, despite cajoling
   from their American mentors, have seemed unable to compromise. Now,
   however, the belated passage of a law to give former members of the
   once-ruling Baath party a better deal may at last unblock the
   political logjam.

   Earlier this month, parliament voted by a show of hands to approve an
   "accountability and justice" act that removes many restrictions
   imposed on the middle (but not top) level of Baath members, whose
   cadres were disproportionately Sunni. Some 30,000 one-time Baathists
   may now apply for pensions or even reinstatement in their old jobs, a
   measure meant to persuade insurgents that there is a place for the
   Sunni elite in Iraq's new political order.

   It is not yet clear whether the new law will do the trick. Radical
   Shias, who complained that its earlier drafts would have let Baathists
   infiltrate back into government and perhaps even stage a coup from
   within, were oddly supportive of the final version; it may not be
   quite as forgiving as it would first appear. Several thousand senior
   Baathists are still excluded. According to some readings of the law,
   others are barred from working in the powerful ministries of interior
   and defence. Some former Baathists complain that, whatever the law
   says, they have no desire anyway to go back to work in ministries now
   dominated by Islamist Shia parties. Others have suggested that the law
   is a ploy to lure them into the open and have them killed.

   In fact, the law's precise provisions may count less than the signal
   sent by its passage. Pensions for retired Baathists will, of course,
   be appreciated. But deBaathification affected a fairly small number of
   people; in some ways it was more a symbol than a tool of Shia
   domination.

   If the Sunni insurgency is to be tamed, it is now more vital for the
   Shia-led government to accommodate a new generation of Sunnis who have
   been strikingly successful in leading a movement known as the "Sunni
   Awakening" against those of the insurgents who are linked to the
   extremists of al-Qaeda, especially in the Euphrates river valley to
   the west and north-west of Baghdad. (The worst bloodshed is now in the
   Tigris river valley north and north-east of Baghdad.)

   The Awakening leaders want their own vigilante groups, known in
   American parlance as "concerned local citizens", to be inducted into
   the official security forces. This would give Sunni towns and
   districts the feeling of policing themselves rather than of being
   occupied by hostile Shia forces. So far, Iraq's prime minister, Nuri
   al-Maliki, has been loth to bring the Sunni vigilantes fully into the
   national security forces for fear they may later turn their arms
   against the new Shia establishment.

   Now for a little trust

   In any event, the hope is that, with the deBaathification dealt with,
   Shia and Sunni leaders may move ahead on other matters and allay some
   of the mistrust that has driven both sides into rigid positions for
   fear of losing sectarian support. Most encouraging, the Iraqi Accord
   Front, the main Sunni alliance in parliament, whose representatives
   walked out of Mr Maliki's coalition government in a huff last summer,
   says it will walk back in, restoring at least a semblance of national
   unity.

   If the government could now pass the oil bill that has been debated
   for two years, Iraqi politics really might get moving. Unfortunately,
   there is still no sign of an early breakthrough. The day after the
   deBaathification law was passed, members of parliament from the
   powerful and virulently anti-Baathist Shia movement led by a fervid
   clergyman, Muqtada al-Sadr, signed a pact with representatives of a
   secular and mainly Shia party led by Iyad Allawi, a former Baathist
   once favoured by the Americans, and with a small Sunni-led party
   called the National Dialogue Front, led by Saleh al-Mutlaq, who
   champions former Baathists' rights. The pact's signatories say that
   the federal government in Baghdad should retain full control of the
   oil industry, whereas the Kurds in their autonomous region still
   insist that they should control, among other things, the management
   and exploration of oil in their area.

   In theory, this odd-looking new alliance in parliament could count on
   up to 100 votes in the 275-member chamber. Since Mr Maliki's alliance
   with the Kurds has frayed, thanks to the row over oil and the failure
   to hold a promised referendum on the disputed province of Kirkuk, 100
   votes could be enough to bring him down. But it is not clear how
   strongly the Sadrists are wedded to the new alliance. Moreover,
   however unpopular Mr Maliki may be, few Iraqis want to restart the
   whole tortuous process of building a coalition government. Besides,
   the Sadrist movement is itself a loose alliance of local warlords and
   pliant populist politicians. Mr Sadr currently spends more time trying
   to keep his own house in order than fighting for more power at the
   national level.

   A possible shift of power in the provinces may have a bigger effect.
   The third big element in the national reconciliation package, after
   the laws to do with the Baath party and oil, is provincial elections.
   Most Sadrist and Sunni politicians refused to stand when they were
   last held, in January 2005, which meant that the provincial councils
   in Sunni areas were unrepresentative and often toothless. If militant
   groups could be persuaded to take part this time, the new councils
   might go some way to empowering the hitherto disaffected Sunnis--and
   perhaps persuade them to engage in peaceful politics. Then there might
   be more than a glimmer of hope of the country's returning to the path
   of peace.

