
   Israel's government may not last long enough to strike a peace deal

                                                                       AP
                                                                       AP

                                     Can Olmert light a candle for peace?


   "SHAS is dividing Jerusalem!" At first glance, the graffito on a wall
   in the city centre looks incongruous. Shas, a religious right-wing
   party in Ehud Olmert's government coalition, vociferously opposes
   relinquishing any of what Israel considers its eternal and indivisible
   capital to a future Palestinian state. But the spray-painted slogan is
   in fact a portent of how peace talks between the Israelis and
   Palestinians, which began this week after being launched at last
   month's summit in Annapolis, may break down.

   Mr Olmert, Israel's prime minister, says he wants to conclude a peace
   agreement within a year, but the received wisdom is that his coalition
   government will fall first. The talks are unluckily timed: Israeli
   coalitions usually break up in their third year, and the five-party
   ensemble led by Mr Olmert's Kadima will have its second birthday in
   May.

   This fragility may be generic to Israeli politics. With so many
   parties jostling for space, their fortunes are volatile and many
   legislators do not get re-elected. So they are loth to destabilise the
   government in the first two years, but then switch to aggressive
   electioneering, seeking issues to make them stand out at the next
   plebiscite.

   The issue this time could be Jerusalem. Since both Israel and the
   Palestinians claim it as their capital, some partition will be
   essential for a peace agreement. This week, after an uproar over
   Israel's plans to build 300 new Jewish homes on West Bank land that it
   annexed to Jerusalem in 1980--actions that are widely regarded abroad
   as illegal--Haim Ramon, Mr Olmert's deputy, said that Israel would
   give up some other annexed neighbourhoods where Palestinians live. But
   Israeli hardliners do not want to surrender even these areas, though
   they contain neither Jews nor Jewish monuments.

   Both Shas and another coalition member, Yisrael Beiteinu, are
   right-wing but opportunistic parties that benefit from being in power.
   They might have quietly swallowed a token partition of Jerusalem
   earlier in the government's term. But in a possible election year, the
   pressure on them to block any concessions to the Palestinians will be
   intense--particularly if the right-wing Likud is the favourite to win,
   as it currently is. The graffito about Shas, plus posters similarly
   denouncing Yisrael Beiteinu which began appearing just before the
   Annapolis summit, shows that the pressure is already on.

   On top of that, Mr Olmert's government could still fall over the final
   report of a commission investigating last year's Lebanon war, or over
   any one of several corruption probes (though those threats have
   recently receded a bit). But the talks with the Palestinians are not
   necessarily doomed to failure. Mr Olmert could push them hard, hoping
   to make enough progress by the time the government does fall to
   persuade moderate voters to re-elect him to finish the job. Or Labour,
   which also supports the peace process, might beat the Likud in an
   election if its leader, Ehud Barak, were to secure general public
   approval in his current job as Mr Olmert's doughty defence minister.

   Those are big gambles, however. Another strategy for Mr Olmert, says
   Gidi Grinstein of the Reut Institute, a think-tank in Tel Aviv, would
   be to retreat from a full-fledged accord and instead try to clinch a
   deal on a provisional Palestinian state, with borders that could
   change later. The Palestinians have long opposed such an approach,
   under which they might lose more land. But if the alternative is a
   total breakdown, it may be their only choice.

