
   A bad week for those looking forward to the end of President Robert
   Mugabe


   EXPECTATIONS had been raised ahead of a summit of southern African
   leaders on March 29th that Robert Mugabe would finally be told,
   politely but firmly, that it was time to go. The meeting had been
   called mainly to discuss Zimbabwe's dreadful economy and the arrests
   and beating of opposition leaders. Surely the president would not get
   off this time?

   Astonishingly, Mr Mugabe got more bouquets than brickbats. The
   assembled heads of state called for sanctions to be lifted to take the
   pressure off their comrade, and declared the grubby presidential
   election of 2002 free and fair. With this sort of endorsement ringing
   in his ears, Mr Mugabe smartly returned to what he knows best:
   intimidating his opponents. He called the beating of the opposition
   leader, Morgan Tsvangirai, not only "deserved" but promised more of
   the same. To cap his perfect week, Zimbabwe's ruling ZANU-PF party
   said Mr Mugabe would be its presidential candidate in next year's
   election.

   Even by the standards of the South African Development Community's
   feeble diplomacy, it was an extraordinary performance. The SADC has
   always argued that America's and Britain's more confrontational
   approach is counter-productive, but this was taking quiet diplomacy to
   the other extreme. For those looking for a glimmer of support from
   their fellow Africans in their struggle to survive Mr Mugabe's regime,
   it was a huge disappointment.

   The only slight bother for Mr Mugabe was a decision to ask South
   Africa's president, Thabo Mbeki, to mediate between the government and
   the opposition. In private, neighbouring countries are growing
   increasingly frustrated and there has been movement behind the scenes.
   Ahead of the summit, both factions of the opposition Movement for
   Democratic Change, which split in 2005, met South African officials
   and presented a joint plan to solve the crisis. At the same time,
   South Africa's deputy president, Phumzile Mlambo-Ngcuka, met her
   Zimbabwean counterpart, Joyce Mujuru, and her husband, a powerful
   ZANU-PF stalwart (and former head of the army) who is said to harbour
   ambitions to succeed Mr Mugabe. Most of those ready for a change
   within the ruling party accept that any way out of the crisis requires
   the opposition's co-operation.

   In truth, though, Mr Mbeki will probably struggle to make much headway
   with Mr Mugabe, who despises the South African president. Pressure on
   him may be stronger from inside the country. Trade unions are
   organising another stay-away this week, and the opposition, though
   weak and divided, is nonetheless showing signs of regrouping. And
   despite the apparent endorsement last week by ZANU-PF of his
   candidacy, Mr Mugabe's standing in his own party has been weakened.
   The endorsement came without much of a vote, and the party's
   constitution automatically anoints its president to run for the
   country's top job.

   Still, the SADC's official show of support for Mr Mugabe has boosted
   his chances of survival, at any rate in the short run. With Africa's
   spineless politicians choosing to let Mr Mugabe carry on mistreating
   his own people, it was left to the country's Catholic church to speak
   out on their behalf. On April 1st, in an unprecedented pastoral
   letter, it denounced Zimbabwe's "racist, corrupt and lawless"
   government, comparing it directly to the regime of white settlers that
   had gone before. "This so-called quiet diplomacy is hogwash," said the
   Archbishop of Bulawayo. "You can't persuade Mugabe to leave. He has to
   be forced out." But how?

