
                                                                  Reuters

                                  Reuters

   Are the latest terrorist bombs in north Africa home-grown, inspired by
   al-Qaeda or actually organised by it?


   THE bombs that shook Algiers and ripped the façade off the prime
   minister's office this week, killing some 30 people, suggest a
   worrying resurgence of the country's Islamist militants since they
   rebranded themselves as al-Qaeda's official arm in the Maghreb. This
   week's counter-attack on bombers in Morocco raises similar questions.
   But they were probably different sorts of terrorists. There is no
   presumption yet that al-Qaeda has effectively activated a joint north
   African front, though it would surely like to do so.

   It is the first time in years that Algeria's capital has been attacked
   on such a scale. Earlier this year there were terrorist shootings in
   Tunisia. In Morocco this week four suicide bombers died in Casablanca
   as they were cornered by security forces, while several other
   terrorist plots in Europe have been linked to north African militants.
   America worries that the vast ungoverned spaces of the Sahara desert
   could provide sanctuary for jihadists.

   For the moment, the biggest danger is in Algeria, where militants have
   been hardened in a brutal insurgency following an Islamist election
   victory in 1991 annulled by the army; at least 100,000 people were
   killed before the civil war dwindled, but did not entirely die out,
   after 1999. The Salafist Group for Preaching and Combat, better known
   by its French acronym, the GSPC, emerged at the insurgency's
   forefront. But it has been hard hit by Algeria's security forces and
   by losing fighters thanks to government amnesties.

   The group has long allied itself to al-Qaeda, but last autumn it
   announced a formal merger with it. On the anniversary of the September
   11th attacks on America, Ayman al-Zawahiri, al-Qaeda's deputy leader,
   declared that the union would be a "thorn in the neck of the American
   and French Crusaders and their allies". In January, the GSPC renamed
   itself the al-Qaeda Organisation in the Islamic Maghreb, echoing what
   the late Abu Musab al-Zarqawi called his terrorist group in Iraq.

   There have been rumours that the Libyan Islamic Fighting Group,
   another al-Qaeda ally, is set to join the union. But Western monitors
   say this is causing a rift between those wanting to fight Muammar
   Qaddafi's regime and exiles hiding in Pakistan who want to join
   al-Qaeda at large.

   Is all this just propaganda to revive the flagging spirits of north
   African insurgents, or the opening of a new front in the global jihad?
   Two bomb attacks against foreign oil workers in Algeria hint that the
   group has adopted the al-Qaeda policy of killing foreigners. But this
   week's bombings in Algiers are more in keeping with the GSPC's
   tradition of hitting the Algerian state.

   Still, some of al-Qaeda's methods are evident: the seven
   near-simultaneous bombs against security forces in February, and this
   week's apparent use of suicide-bombers, a rare tactic in Algeria. Many
   north Africans have joined Iraq's insurgency; veterans are apparently
   returning to wage jihad at home or in Europe.

   The jihadists stirring next door in Morocco so far seem less
   proficient than their Algerian cousins. Last year King Muhammad ended
   military conscription and reorganised much of his security apparatus
   after Islamists infiltrated his armed forces. The trial of 50 people
   accused of trying to overthrow the monarchy is due to begin in May.
   Separately, security forces have been unravelling a web of militants
   said to have been planning suicide-bomb attacks on foreign ships,
   hotels and police buildings.

   The police got a lucky break last month, when the group's suspected
   leader got into a row with the owner of an internet café in Casablanca
   who apparently objected to him reading jihadist web sites, locked the
   door and tried to call the police. In the following weeks, police
   arrested 24 suspects.

   Then, early on April 10th, they surrounded a safe house in the city.
   One man blew himself up in what witnesses said was a cloud of red mist
   while a second was shot dead as he fumbled with his suicide belt. Two
   others who escaped later blew themselves up. The gang leader and
   several of those arrested had been freed from prison under a pardon in
   2005 after being jailed following a wave of suicide-bombings that
   killed 45 people in 2003.

   Morocco's communications minister says the bombers did not seem to
   have external links. "It really appears to be an amateur group, since
   the explosives we found on them and in the caches we discovered were
   basic and home-made, from household items."

   Maybe so. The scale of al-Qaeda's involvement in the Maghreb is still
   uncertain. And though its ideology of waging jihad against the West
   appeals strongly to some, the al-Qaeda bombing of Arab civilian
   targets--for instance, in Jordan in 2005--has stirred widespread local
   revulsion. Will it do the same in the Maghreb?

