
   A brave woman seeks justice and historical recognition for past wrongs

                                                                       AP
                                                                       AP

                                 Still seeking justice for their children


   TYRANTS tend to be oddly punctilious about recording their atrocities.
   But even by the standards of his peers, Mengistu Haile Mariam,
   Ethiopia's former dictator, was an incorrigible archivist. The
   security services of his regime, which took power in 1974, learned the
   habits of bureaucratic procedure from true masters, the East Germans,
   who sent Stasi agents to Ethiopia as consultants. When Mr Mengistu
   fell and fled in 1991, he left behind thousands of pages of memoranda,
   death warrants and even the minutes of a meeting in 1975 when his
   ruling committee, known as the Derg, voted to murder the imprisoned
   emperor, Haile Selassie.

   These files form the basis for thousands of criminal cases brought by
   an Ethiopian special prosecutor since Mr Mengistu fell. The charge
   sheet and evidence for his trial in absentia for genocide run to some
   8,000 pages. Though he remains a sheltered guest of Zimbabwe's
   president, Robert Mugabe, a court sentenced him this year to life in
   prison, so ending the special prosecutor's work. But what will happen
   to all that fragile and incriminating paper?

   A woman named Hirut Abebe-Jiri has made it her mission to see that the
   historical record is preserved. Herself imprisoned and tortured during
   a purge known as the "Red Terror", Ms Hirut has set up an organisation
   to archive, translate and index the Derg's files, and make them
   available on the internet through a partnership with the University of
   North Dakota in the United States. A Canadian resident, she recently
   went back to Addis Ababa, which she fled as a refugee, and signed an
   agreement with the government that calls for the transfer of the
   documents into the hands of her Ethiopian Red Terror Documentation and
   Research Centre. Her model is Yale University's Cambodian Genocide
   Programme, which documents Khmer Rouge atrocities in the 1970s.

   Despite many trials over the years, many Ethiopians still do not know
   what happened to family members who disappeared during the Red Terror.
   Ms Hirut hopes that her archive and its website will let
   Ethiopians--including those in the diaspora--learn the truth.

   She knows the power of written words: they brought justice in her own
   case. During the Red Terror, Ms Hirut, then 17, was imprisoned and
   beaten up. Years later, she discovered that the man who had ordered
   her torture, a notorious Derg functionary called Kelbessa Negewo, had
   emigrated to the United States and was working as a bellhop at a hotel
   in Atlanta, Georgia. Along with two other former victims, she sued him
   in an American court. The most powerful evidence against him was his
   own memos to his superiors, in which he boasted about his "struggle to
   eliminate the anti-revolutionaries". Last year, after more than a
   decade of legal battles, he was deported back to Ethiopia. He is now
   serving a life sentence for murder.

