
   Jacob Zuma, presidential hopeful

                                                                  Reuters
                                                                  Reuters

                                                                Party man


   ONCE his country's deputy president, Jacob Zuma has had a rough few
   years. He was sacked by President Thabo Mbeki in 2005 after his
   financial adviser, Schabir Shaik, was convicted of fraud and
   corruption. The following year he was tried for rape. He was
   acquitted, but then faced charges of fraud and corruption. The case
   was kicked out of court, but the National Prosecuting Authority may
   still have another go. The veteran political leader has been ridiculed
   and vilified, written off by many as politically finished or unfit to
   rule.

   All this would have buried the career of many other politicians. Yet,
   surprisingly, Mr Zuma, who is still deputy leader of the ruling
   African National Congress (ANC) party, remains a front-runner to win
   the presidency of the party in elections due in December. That would
   make him a virtual shoo-in to be South Africa's next president when Mr
   Mbeki goes in 2009.

   His home in a rich, formerly all-white neighbourhood of Johannesburg
   feels as laid back as the man himself appears. Local music plays in
   the background and people casually come in and out. A portrait of
   himself painted on a goat skin towers over the room from the
   mezzanine. Wearing an elegant suit and laughing often, Mr Zuma is
   engaging without being familiar, as well as articulate and imposing.
   Yet for all the friendliness, the bruises of the past few years show;
   he offers guarded and careful answers.

   Unlike many ANC leaders, Mr Zuma, born into a very poor family in
   KwaZulu Natal, received little formal education. By 15 he was taking
   odd jobs to help his widowed mother make ends meet. This, added to his
   years as a political prisoner and an exile in Zambia, Swaziland and
   Mozambique during apartheid, partly explains his popularity among the
   ANC rank-and-file. He is at home among ordinary South Africans, who
   feel he is one of them. His ease in crowds and at rallies has often
   been compared favourably to the stiff and cerebral style of Mr Mbeki.

   Mr Zuma joined the ANC in the late 1950s, still a teenager, and rose
   through the ranks to become head of intelligence when the party was
   underground. His ability to listen and bring people together was
   instrumental in putting an end to violence between the ANC and the
   largely Zulu Inkatha Freedom Party in the 1990s. He successfully
   applied the same negotiating skills in Burundi a few years later.

   But then there are the scandals. An investigation relating to a
   government arms deal from the late 1990s still hangs over him. The
   lengthy saga has so far not translated into a trial that could either
   confirm the accusations or put them to rest. Mr Zuma argues that this
   is unfair, and attributes much of his support within the ANC to the
   way he has been treated. Critics argue that the more recent Shaik case
   and the rape trial have highlighted, at best, serious lapses of
   judgement. Most damaging was his admission in court that he had had
   unprotected sex with an HIV-positive woman, and had then taken a
   shower to limit the risks of infection. This was met with outrage and
   disbelief by many, especially as Mr Zuma had headed the government's
   official anti-AIDS campaign.

   Mr Zuma believes that the court cases in themselves have not tarnished
   his reputation with supporters, but that the media have damaged his
   image with the broader public. "They have deliberately made a joke out
   of me," he says bitterly. His most ardent supporters, to be found
   within an eclectic crowd of disgruntled ANC and trade-union members,
   go one step further and maintain that he is the victim of a political
   conspiracy.

   More worrying is whether Mr Zuma's primary political talent is to say
   whatever people want to hear, regardless of consequences. He was
   accused of gay-bashing for comments he made during a speech about
   traditional Zulu values. He said he was misunderstood and apologised.
   There are also concerns that the support Mr Zuma enjoys from trade
   unions and the left of the ANC could lead to a shift in economic
   policy were he to become president. But for all his apparent
   outspokenness and gregariousness, the ANC deputy president is, above
   all, a disciplined party man. "When the ANC decides, the party view
   becomes my view," he says, before adding that "One critical thing in
   the ANC is unity and collective leadership." A recent ANC policy
   conference broadly endorsed the current government's economic
   direction, which has underpinned good macroeconomic performance.

   This may explain why business circles do not seem too worried about
   the prospect of a Zuma presidency. It may also be true that many do
   not believe he will be South Africa's next president. The ANC branches
   are about to start debating their choice of nominee for the party
   leadership. Mr Zuma dismisses questions over whether he would accept a
   nomination, but characteristically argues that he has never refused
   any job that the ANC has asked him to do.

