
   Old suspicions and new links

   RELATIONS between Iran's Shia revolutionaries and the rich,
   Sunni-dominated, American-protected Arabian monarchies of the Persian
   Gulf have never been easy. After America's invasion of Iraq in 2003,
   and Iran's election of the fire-breathing Mahmoud Ahmadinejad as
   president in 2005, they grew markedly worse. Arab fears of Iran's
   regional ambitions, its influence over Shia minorities and its nuclear
   programme have lately been matched by Iranian worries about the
   loyalty of its own Arabs and the possibility of an attack launched
   from the American bases that speckle the opposite shore.

   But recent events signal a possible change. On the same day on which a
   new American National Intelligence Estimate overturned previous
   assertions that Iran is actively pursuing nuclear weapons, President
   Ahmadinejad made a first-ever appearance as a guest at the annual
   summit of the Gulf Co-operation Council (GCC), a body created in 1981
   largely with the goal of containing revolutionary Iran. Soon after the
   summit meeting, Saudi Arabia, the biggest by far of the GCC's six
   member states and long the most hostile to Iran, invited Mr
   Ahmadinejad to take part in the annual haj pilgrimage to Mecca.
   Another Arab heavyweight, Egypt, has also joined the charm offensive,
   sending its first high-level delegation to Iran in several years.

   Cross-Gulf suspicions, however, have not suddenly evaporated. Like
   many Western governments, the Gulf monarchies remain concerned that
   Iran's nuclear programme is oddly shaped for civilian-only purposes
   (see [3]article). Arab leaders continue to charge Iran with a host of
   misdemeanours, ranging from alleged meddling in Iraq, Lebanon and
   Palestine to occupying a trio of mid-Gulf islands claimed by the
   United Arab Emirates (UAE). Mr Ahmadinejad's proposal, at the summit,
   to pursue a regional security pact "without foreign influence" was
   viewed sceptically, as merely a way for Iran to replace America as the
   Gulf's guardian.

   Still, there is relief over the lessening of tensions. However much
   they dislike Iran's mullahs, Gulf Arabs dislike more the idea of
   getting caught up in a war between Iran and America. In recent months
   they have not been especially happy with their erstwhile American
   ally, despite the Bush administration's belated effort to address Arab
   concerns over Palestine and to disentangle itself from Iraq. Earlier
   this year, for instance, the parliament of Bahrain, an island state
   that hosts America's Fifth Fleet, passed a non-binding motion banning
   the use of its territory for any attack on Iran.

   Economic considerations are also playing their part. Cross-Gulf trade
   is growing fast. Bahrain itself recently signed a deal to import
   Iranian natural gas. And this link pales by comparison with the
   flourishing trade between Iran and Dubai, the most mercantile of the
   seven emirates that make up the UAE.

   Partly because of sanctions, and partly because of the restrictive
   business environment in Iran, tiny Dubai has become a vital lifeline
   for its vast neighbour. As many as 400,000 Iranian expatriates now
   live in the UAE, with nearly 9,000 part-Iranian-owned firms registered
   with the Dubai Chamber of Commerce and Industry. Iran is the main
   destination for exports from Dubai, with much of the volume hauled by
   the scores of picturesque dhows that line the city-state's Creek. The
   Iranian leadership likes to paint this relationship as one that
   benefits Gulf Arabs more than itself. But with its own inefficient
   economy foundering, and with the GCC countries jointly wielding
   hundreds of billions of dollars in investment capital, it is the Arabs
   who now carry greater clout.

