
   In a country where corruption infects almost everything, is reform
   feasible?

   THE Nigerian National Petroleum Corporation, for decades a source of
   corruption and national shame, is to be abolished by Nigeria's new
   president, Umaru Yar'Adua, and replaced by five new companies. The
   president, who will head a special oil council to oversee the changes,
   says he wants the reforms completed in six months. It would be an
   astonishing achievement if it happens and works.

   The industry has been very badly run for years. On September 21st a
   federal budget report said that the corporation had somehow failed to
   remit 647 billion naira (almost $5.2 billion) expected by the treasury
   last month. Production in June fell by 750,000 barrels a day, far
   below its capacity of 3m b/d.

   As well as incompetence, civil unrest has been to blame. Violence and
   pipeline sabotage have reduced output to a drip in the oil-rich Niger
   Delta, where Port Harcourt, the main city, has been under curfew for a
   month. Shell, Chevron and several other big companies have been forced
   to close their pipelines and sabotage has hobbled already decrepit
   refineries, which operated at only about one-third of their potential
   between 1999 and 2004. The Americans reckon that Nigeria has lost some
   $16 billion in export earnings in the past two years.

   Even before the violence erupted in the Delta, the industry was a
   mess. A string of military rulers saw oil revenue as a source of
   patronage and a reward for winning office. Governments spent more time
   fixing lucrative extraction contracts than investing in refineries.
   Louis Brown Ogbeifun, a former head of an oil managers' union, says a
   refinery manager could spend only $35,000 without having to ask
   permission from the central government, whereas his counterpart on the
   extraction side could spend up to $2 million off his own bat on a
   single project. When pipelines broke or were sabotaged, managers on
   the spot would have to wait for approval from the capital before
   mending them.

   Regulation has been equally erratic. Since the corporation was founded
   in 1977, its regulating arm, which was recently hived off into a new
   and supposedly independent body called the Department of Petroleum
   Resources, went in and out of company control. The new regulatory
   outfit is weak. Its cash-strapped employees still depend for various
   services, such as transport, on the oil companies they are supposed to
   monitor. The department keeps notoriously poor records. Humphrey
   Asobie, head of the Nigerian branch of Transparency International, a
   Berlin-based anti-corruption lobby, says that pay is far too low to
   stop graft.

   In a country in which oil brings in 76% of government revenues, small
   cracks cause big leaks. Audits by the Nigerian Extractive Industries
   Transparency Initiative, a body set up by the previous government,
   found that the accuracy of production figures varies widely depending
   on the purpose of the report in question. No proper metering tracks
   the output of crude oil, so no one knows exactly how much Nigeria
   produces or how much is lost in transit.

   The new government, formed only two months ago, has been admirably
   quick to take action. It has awarded a contract worth $52m to fix
   damaged pipelines in the Delta region and promised to get refineries
   working again by December. Monitoring is also improving. In May,
   before the new government was formed, Nigeria's federal parliament
   passed a law requiring the outfit that runs the transparency
   initiative to audit the oil and gas sector every year, whereas
   previously it did so every five years. The new law also provides for
   companies and officials who fail to give the auditors accurate and
   timely information to be fined.

   To push all these reforms through, the government will have to carry
   out some nifty legal manoeuvres. The energy ministry announced its
   plans before Parliament could repeal the 1977 act that created the old
   oil corporation. If the president's six-month deadline is to be met,
   Parliament will have to rush through a law to create a new national
   oil company. An energy ministry official says that all 117 laws on gas
   and oil on the statute books will have to be reassessed.

   But President Yar'Adua must take care not to cut any legal corners.
   Earlier this year, his predecessor, Olusegun Obasanjo, sold off
   several refineries in the dying days of his presidency without
   disclosing how the deals were done. In protest against this and
   against a jump in the price of petrol, there was a general strike for
   a few days in July; the new president was obliged to revoke the
   contracts. He will be loth to make the same mistake as his
   predecessor, so he has appointed two committees to draft the reforms
   and consider what laws should be passed first. But unless he manages
   to pacify the people of the Delta and so secure its pipelines and
   refineries, the reforms will be in vain.

