
   Some political prisoners have been freed but many more are still in
   jail

   AN ETHIOPIAN federal court judge surprised everyone this week by
   throwing out the charges of genocide and treason brought against
   opposition politicians and their allies arising from the violent
   protests against the general-election results of 2005. The clemency
   was not all it appeared, but it is good news all the same.

   Twenty-five of the 100 or more suspects were freed from prison
   immediately, most of them journalists and publishers. However,
   opposition leaders, including Berhanu Nega and Hailu Shawel, remain
   behind bars. They now face separate charges of attempting to overthrow
   the government of President Meles Zenawi through the street protests
   that led to the deaths of at least 193 civilians and six policemen
   after the flawed election. An independent inquiry collapsed when
   several of its judges fled abroad, citing threats and government
   attempts at a cover-up.

   Human-rights groups are heartened by the judge's decision but point
   out that the remaining charges still carry the possibility of a death
   sentence or life in prison. Opposition supporters are divided. Some
   think their leaders should now defend the charges, which they have so
   far refused to do. The verdict will relieve foreign diplomats in Addis
   Ababa, the capital; they have been tying themselves in knots to defend
   the failings of a government that is one of their largest recipients
   of aid.

   This is particularly true of the United States. Despite the misgivings
   of some congressmen, who think Mr Meles a dictator, some in the Bush
   administration see "Christian" Ethiopia (where half the people are in
   fact Muslim) as a bulwark against Islamist expansion in the Horn of
   Africa. Proof of that came to light recently with the embarrassing
   revelation that Ethiopia had been allowed to buy arms from North
   Korea, despite the UN sanctions against that country that America had
   insisted on.

   The Americans were also indirectly involved in the detention of 41
   "terror suspects" in Ethiopian prisons after the rout of Islamist
   forces in Somalia in January. The Ethiopians, who led the war against
   the Islamists, say the prisoners were not held secretly and that they
   had consular and legal representation. But they do admit that American
   and other foreign intelligence agents interrogated some of them; most
   of them are now due to be released.

   So where are the terrorists who were supposed to have been rounded up
   after the fall of Somalia's Islamists? Ethiopia is still embroiled in
   Somalia. Some Somalis say that last week's fighting in Mogadishu,
   their capital, caused more than 1,000 deaths. But no al-Qaeda people
   or Somali jihadists were reported killed or captured. Bad news for
   Ethiopia--and by extension America.

