
   Indonesia has some worrying radicals but it seems to be following
   Turkey, with Islamists moderating as they get closer to power

                                                                   Magnum

                                   Magnum


   IS INDONESIA, the most populous Muslim-majority country, undergoing
   creeping Islamisation? It is not hard to assemble enough recent
   evidence to give Western Islamophobes goosebumps. In late December a
   mob attacked and burned a prayer house in West Java belonging to
   Ahmadiyah, a sect deemed heretical by some mainstream Islamic
   scholars. Earlier in the month the country's Christian leaders
   complained that Muslim radicals, helped by local officials, had
   carried out a string of attacks on churches. Ten Muslim militants were
   jailed for attacks on Christians on Sulawesi island, including the
   beheading of three schoolgirls. In late November the religious-affairs
   ministry barred a liberal Egyptian scholar, Nasr Hamid Abu Zayd (who
   calls the Koran a "cultural product"), from public speaking in
   Indonesia.

   Behind many recent incidents is a vigilante group, the Islam
   Defenders' Front (FPI), which in September assaulted bars, cafés and
   hotels in Bogor, near Jakarta, accusing them of violating Ramadan.
   Another rising radical force is the Indonesian chapter of
   Hizb-ut-Tahrir, which wants a caliphate to rule the whole Muslim
   world. Last August it gathered perhaps 90,000 supporters in a Jakarta
   stadium. Its leaders condemned democracy on the basis that sovereignty
   lies in God's hands, not the people's. A not dissimilar attack on
   pluralism was made in a hardline fatwa issued in 2005 by the
   Indonesian Ulemas Council (MUI). This same semi-official body recently
   demanded the banning of the liberal Egyptian scholar.

   In 2006 a poll found that one in ten Indonesians supported terrorist
   attacks like the 2002 Bali bombings if intended to "protect the
   faith". Jemaah Islamiah (JI), the terror group behind the Bali
   attacks, is still running several dozen pesantren (boarding schools),
   putting who knows what into impressionable teenage heads. The Bali
   bombers are due to be executed in the next few weeks, possibly
   triggering a backlash by radicals.

   This all sounds worrying. But Indonesia is a huge, varied and complex
   place, and the radicals--even though some have a semi-official
   platform--are a small and not very influential minority. Contrary
   evidence abounds: liberals as well as radicals are making inroads.
   They have won a big battle over a "pornography" law that Islamists
   proposed in 2006. It would have banned bikinis and short skirts, for
   non-Muslim women too, and prohibited the Hindu minority's traditional
   dances. But a public outcry forced lawmakers to strike out all the
   controversial bits--and it still has not passed in parliament. Two new
   anti-terrorist police squads have made much progress in arresting and
   breaking up JI's leadership. There have been no attacks on foreign
   targets for two years.

   As Indonesia democratised after the fall of the (secular) Suharto
   regime in 1998, local authorities gained autonomy and became directly
   elected. Many seized the opportunity to pass sharia-based laws,
   stoking fears of Islamisation. However, Greg Fealy, an Australian
   expert on Indonesian Islam, says these laws, though successful in
   winning votes for the local politicians pushing them, have usually had
   little practical impact. He recently revisited one such district,
   Tasikmalaya, where he found "there were more schoolgirls wearing the
   headscarf but just as much gambling, prostitution and drinking as
   before."

   The formerly separatist region of Aceh was allowed, under a peace pact
   with the rebels, to introduce strict sharia. The move was popular at
   first, says Sidney Jones of the International Crisis Group, a
   think-tank, but there was widespread revulsion when the authorities
   started publicly whipping miscreants. As a result the religious police
   were drastically reined in. Overall, Indonesians seem to prefer the
   idea of living under "God's law" to the practice of it. Indonesian
   Islam has always been distinct from the Middle Eastern kind, infusing
   influences from Hinduism and other religions. This will make it hard
   for fundamentalists to get far, says Muhammad Hikam, a political
   consultant.

   Whereas a relatively small number of fiery militants and
   fundamentalists get most attention, Mr Hikam says that liberal Islamic
   scholars have successfully broken the link between religious piety and
   political Islam. Indonesians seeking a more overt expression of their
   faith, as many do nowadays, can still believe in separation of mosque
   and state. As the 2009 presidential and parliamentary elections
   approach, secular parties have been attracting voters by creating
   Islamic--but not Islamist--wings. The in-phrase, says Mr Fealy, is
   Islam Lunak, "soft Islam". Pollsters are telling politicians that it
   helps to add a mild religious tinge to speeches about social justice
   and anti-corruption. But radical stuff, like preaching an Islamic
   state, is a turn-off.

   Indonesia's two biggest Muslim organisations are Nahdlatul Ulama
   (NU)--whose long-time leader, Abdurrahman Wahid was president of
   Indonesia in 1999-2001--and Muhammadiyah, which together claim around
   70m members. They indeed used to call for an Islamic state. Nowadays
   Masdar Farid Mas'udi, a senior NU figure, says all they mean by an
   "Islamic" state is a just and prosperous one. In some ways the two
   bodies have come to resemble Europe's mainstream Christian churches:
   "Catholic" NU stresses traditional rites and the authority of
   religious leaders, whereas "Protestant" Muhammadiyah stresses the
   primacy of scripture. As with Catholics and Protestants it is family
   tradition, rather than theology, that usually determines which group
   one belongs to. Both now accept Indonesia's secular founding creed,
   pancasila, which preaches religious tolerance (though you are supposed
   to believe in God).

   Moderate success

   Several of the country's political parties began life as the political
   wings of religious movements such as NU and Muhammidiyah. But the
   parties and their parent bodies have drifted apart, even as all have
   mellowed. In recent elections a more religiously conservative group,
   Prosperous Justice (PKS), has gained votes--but polls now show its
   support slumping. One reason is that it backed the pornography law and
   has suffered in the backlash against it.

   Another, admits Zulkieflimansyah, a senior PKS parliamentarian, is
   that it has joined the (secular) coalition of President Susilo Bambang
   Yudhoyono. Its popularity has suffered because of tough policies such
   as cutting fuel subsidies. Mr Zulkieflimansyah sees his party as
   undergoing a desirable process of moderation as it "encounters
   reality". PKS--like longer-established Muslim parties before it--is
   now having to ditch the fire and brimstone to transcend minority
   appeal. Rising younger figures in the party, like him, are more
   comfortable with this than its older generation, who studied in the
   Middle East. In general, the country's larger Muslim parties are
   echoing Turkey's ruling AK party--ditching Islamism while still
   appealing to the pious. Smaller ones still holding to a hard line may
   fare badly in 2009: Mr Fealy reckons that in 200 regional elections in
   the past two-and-a-half years not a single "sectarian" Muslim
   candidate has won.

   Indonesia is, overall, edging away from radical Islamism. But the
   trend is not irreversible, and the authorities must avoid fostering
   fundamentalists by pandering to them. The MUI (the council of mullahs)
   and the FPI (the vigilantes) provide a lesson: both were created, for
   temporary reasons of expediency, by the Suharto regime but both have
   lingered to haunt its democratic successors. Mr Yudhoyono now seems to
   be trying to channel the MUI's radical enthusiasm into issuing fatwas
   against "deviant" Islamic sects like Ahmadiyah. But this only
   encourages the FPI to take up its cudgels.

   Other, more important ways to make sure Indonesia stays on the path to
   democratic pluralism are to keep the economy growing and to boost
   sluggish efforts at reforming graft-ridden public institutions. High
   unemployment provides recruits for communal violence like that in
   Sulawesi--whether or not religion is the spark that ignites the
   tinder. Poverty, combined with disgust at corrupt officialdom, push
   some people towards the Utopian promises of groups such as
   Hizb-ut-Tahrir. In Indonesia, unlike most Muslim countries, the
   ideological struggle between various forms of Islam is being fought
   largely by democratic means. The violent and the intolerant are still
   at the margins and, while the country's steady progress persists, look
   likely to stay there.

