
   Iraq's Kurds have never had it so good. But they still have a long way
   to go before securing a safe and stable, let alone democratic, future


   DURING a recent voyage around Iraqi Kurdistan, not a single sign or
   hint that the place is officially part of a federal Iraq was in
   evidence. Landing at Erbil International Airport (as the Kurds call
   it, invariably also noting that it has one of the longest runways in
   the world), you see no shadow of an Iraqi, as opposed to Kurdish,
   presence. You show your passport or offer your bags for inspection to
   officers bearing bright Kurdish insignia on crisp uniforms.

   In the past month, virtually no insurgent violence has been recorded
   in Iraqi Kurdistan, bar a shocking but isolated spate of
   suicide-bombings that killed more than 400 members of the Yazidi sect
   in two villages near Sinjar, on the fringe of the area controlled by
   the Kurds. Otherwise, the last big attacks were in May--one in Erbil,
   the Kurds' capital, the other in a town of mixed population, Makhmour,
   on the contested western edge of the region, killing at least 30
   people.

   In the rest of Iraq, by contrast, nearly a thousand civilians and
   insurgents have been killed in the same period, along with more than
   70 American soldiers. There are no American forces in Iraqi Kurdistan,
   bar a handful guarding a small American diplomatic compound outside
   Erbil. The only sizeable foreign military presence is a South Korean
   force of around 1,200, which spends much of its time helping with
   construction and IT. In short, Iraqi Kurdistan is a haven of peace in
   a sea of turmoil.

   Travellers arriving at Erbil airport jostle with Lebanese bankers,
   Norwegian oilmen and Dubai traders sniffing for business; most now
   give bomb-ridden Baghdad, 250 miles (400km) to the south, a wide
   berth. At the eight or nine security checkpoints through which you
   pass on the road from Erbil to Sulaymaniyah, the two main cities of
   Iraq's Kurdistan Region, as international documents officially call
   it, you never spot the name of Iraq on a military or police badge.

   Arabic is used hardly at all; few Kurds under 25 understand more than
   a smattering of it. Schools are starting to teach English as much as
   Arabic as a second language. Increasingly, you are expected to call
   Erbil by its Kurdish name, Hawler (pronounced, roughly, "How-lair").
   Above all, the Iraqi flag, in a region where flags matter mightily,
   flutters nowhere. It has no place at the airport or over any official
   building, such as the Kurds' lively parliament.

   The issue of maps (above) is just as toxic and tricky. Where, indeed,
   are the borders of Iraqi Kurdistan (let alone those of the parts of
   Turkey, Iran and Syria, where another 21m-plus Kurds reside, alongside
   4.6m Iraqi ones)? The Iraqi Kurds' standard map that hangs nowadays on
   ministry walls, in restaurants and for sale in kiosks shows Iraqi
   Kurdistan stretching a lot further than the area currently under the
   Kurds' control.

   It sweeps in an arc from Sinjar and Zakho, in the north-west, near the
   border with Turkey, brushes Mosul's once largely Kurdish east side,
   then runs down the east bank of the river Tigris, taking in the whole
   of the contested province of Kirkuk (which Arab maps call Tamim), then
   runs on along the Hamrin mountains north-east of Baghdad, all the way
   down to a sliver of land east of the Iraqi capital, abutting the
   Iranian border near the town of Badreh.

   Even the most acquisitively nationalist Kurds do not take this maximal
   map seriously. For one thing, some of it is inhabited predominantly by
   Arabs--who would not be trusted in Kurdistan. But most Kurds do demand
   fat chunks of extra territory, especially but not only in Kirkuk
   province, which they were deprived of by Saddam when he Arabised
   Kurdish lands by expelling Kurds and bringing in Arab settlers from
   Iraq's south and centre.

   It is hard to say exactly where Kurdish influence or control now
   extends, though a "green line" has roughly demarcated their zone since
   the end of the first Gulf war in 1991, giving Kurds an area in which
   they could safely govern themselves. But after the American invasion
   of 2003 they extended their zone of influence, marked by their own
   checkpoints (technically manned by the Iraqi army but actually by
   Kurdish units of it), in predominantly Kurdish areas west and south of
   the green line, which has become blurred and sporadically shifts.

   The Iraqi Kurds' standard map tactfully omits to paint the Greater
   Kurdistan where their ethnic brethren predominate in neighbouring
   Turkey (14m of them), Iran (some 6m) and Syria (1m). It certainly does
   not lay claim, as dreamers of a unified Greater Kurdistan do, to a
   fantastical spur of land that would jut across south-eastern Turkey
   and northern Syria to reach the Mediterranean, plus another tongue of
   territory stretching south-eastwards to let Kurds dip their toes in
   the Persian Gulf beyond Basra. That would be going too far.

   But for every Iraqi Kurd, Article 140 of the Iraqi constitution that
   was endorsed in an Iraq-wide referendum in late 2005 is a national
   mantra repeated in almost every political conversation. That article
   provides for a further referendum, following a census and a supposedly
   voluntary exchange of populations known optimistically as
   "normalisation", to determine whether people in Kirkuk province "and
   other disputed territories" want to stay as part of the Arab-ruled
   part of Iraq or join Kurdistan or perhaps, in the case of Kirkuk, live
   in a specially administered region.

   Too many Kirkuks

   That census, due to have been completed by the end of July, has barely
   begun. Most Kurdish politicians still insist publicly that the
   December 31st deadline for holding the referendum will, as the
   constitution says, be met. In private, most admit it will not. What
   they dread most is an open-ended postponement which may, they fear,
   let Kirkuk, with some 5% of the world's oil reserves, slip out of
   their grasp.

   Nor has it been decided just what questions would be asked, nor
   whether the people's wishes would be assessed district by district or
   province-wide. Officially, the Kurds want the whole province. In fact,
   many realise it would be more sensible to take just those districts
   where they are a large majority rather than incorporate slices of
   territory full of sullen Sunni Arabs who might make Kurdistan
   unworkable. At the least, the Kurds would take back the large chunks
   of Kirkuk province that Saddam gerrymandered out of the old Kurdish
   region. But the blanket of stability covering the area of Iraqi
   Kurdistan recognised by the government in Baghdad emphatically
   excludes Kirkuk city, now sealed off from the rest of Kurdistan by a
   series of intrusive checkpoints.

   Indeed, the tinderbox city at the heart of the matter is fizzling ever
   more menacingly. Per head of population, acts of violence are now more
   frequent there than in bloody Baghdad, according to a Western diplomat
   who monitors the score. Moreover, in some nearby towns in Kirkuk
   province to the south and west of the city, such as Arab-dominated
   Hawija, al-Qaeda and Saddam loyalists have established a brooding
   presence.

                                                                  Reuters
                                                                  Reuters

                                 Talabani and Barzani, pals for the cause

   Though the Kurds' line of influence (if not control) extends into some
   two-thirds of Kirkuk province, there are plenty of blurred areas.
   Kurds control the towns of Chamchamal, Kifri and Kalar, to the east of
   Kirkuk city, and hold sway over Khaniquin, near the border with Iran.
   But other towns, such as Tuz Kurmatu, which has a strong and twitchy
   Turkoman populace, and Dubus, where Arabs predominate, resist what
   they see as the Kurds' expansion into Kirkuk province's southern half.

   The oil factor is important but not crucial: if Kurdistan stays part
   of a federal Iraq, the Arabs in non-oil-rich parts of Iraq would still
   get a fair share of oil revenues, whether or not Kirkuk is run by the
   Kurds. The Kurds have agreed that they would get 17% of Iraq's oil
   income from fields already in operation. But they are still arguing
   with the authorities in Baghdad over the management, exploration and
   contracts in unexploited or not-yet-discovered fields.

   Economically viable?

   Several oil companies, mostly mid-sized and small independent ones,
   have signed deals with the Kurdistan regional government, and a dozen
   more are in negotiation, all waiting impatiently for the government in
   Baghdad to give the green light. The Kurds say they can dish out
   export permits, though the authorities in Baghdad disagree. More to
   the point, the Kurds do not control the existing pipelines for export.
   So they want to build their own "feeder" pipelines to join the
   national one just before it reaches the Turkish border. Several
   Western firms hope to get in on this act.

   Plainly, the Kurds are seeking to be as independent in economics as a
   landlocked country can be: a huge challenge. From 1991 until 2003,
   when the Americans invaded, the Kurds depended on smuggling, minimal
   trade with neighbouring countries, foreign handouts and a share (often
   stingily and belatedly distributed) of the UN's corrupt and
   maladministered oil-for-food programme. In the past few years they
   have tried valiantly to create an economy of their own. But they are
   starting almost from scratch.

   Farming was virtually destroyed by Saddam. According to today's
   planning minister, the percentage of Kurds in agriculture has dropped
   from some 60% to around 10% in the past generation. During his Anfal
   (Spoils) campaign to suppress the rebellious Kurds in the late 1980s,
   Saddam's forces destroyed more than 4,000 villages and killed tens of
   thousands of civilians--180,000, according to the Kurds.

   There is no banking ("We have no access to money," says Osman Shwani,
   the planning minister), no insurance, no postal service and in the
   past few years the Kurds' budget has entirely lacked public scrutiny.
   Commercial law is less than rudimentary. There is a gaping lack of
   statistics. Mr Shwani freely admits he does not know the size of
   Kurdistan's GDP.

   Starting from zero

   There is virtually no tax system. In theory, income tax of between 3%
   and 10% is paid by salaried earners. "But no one has ever paid taxes,"
   says Mr Shwani. One of the biggest brakes on the economy is the vast
   proportion of people on the public payroll, which gobbles up about
   three-quarters of the budget.

   But things are starting to move in the right direction. Parliament,
   elected five times since 1992, has had vigorous debates over
   Kurdistan's own oil laws--on how, for instance, to handle contracts
   with foreign investors. But even they will depend to a degree on
   harmonisation with the oil laws still not passed by a dismally weak
   and divided central government in Baghdad.

   Another huge problem for Iraqi Kurdistan is the fact that it has been
   run, since 1991, by two rival administrations. In the provinces of
   Dohuk and Erbil, the Barzani family, which runs the Kurdistan
   Democratic Party (KDP), has called the shots for generations. To the
   east, the province of Sulaymaniyah has been run by the Patriotic Union
   of Kurdistan (PUK), run by Jalal Talabani; this, too, has become
   something of a family affair. In the late 1990s, the two outfits
   fought a vicious civil war, in which at least 3,000 people--some put
   the figure at more than 10,000--were killed.

   To a large degree, the party and the union are tribal fiefs, with
   power, money and even land distributed from the top by the ruling
   families. While Mr Talabani is currently president of federal Iraq,
   Massoud Barzani is president of Kurdistan; his nephew, Nechirvan
   Barzani, is its prime minister; Massoud's son, Masrur Barzani, heads
   the powerful intelligence service. At the end of the year, one of Mr
   Talabani's men is supposed to take over as Kurdistan's prime minister.
   No one is sure whether that will happen smoothly.

   Moreover, the notion that Iraqi Kurdistan is a haven of democracy is
   far-fetched. The two fiefs control virtually all public activity,
   including the media, hitherto with remarkably little scrutiny;
   outright opposition has invariably been squeezed out, often amid
   accusations of betraying the sacred cause of Kurdistan.
   Patronage--some call it corruption--is the norm. The Islamists, with a
   reputation for honesty, are the third force, small for now, but
   waiting in the wings. If Kurdistan is to thrive, its own politics must
   loosen up and become more open, if not a Western-style free-for-all.

   Real country, real democracy?

   Yet on both scores--democracy and unity--there has been progress. The
   two administrations are undergoing a merger. All but three ministries
   have joined up (the last to unite being the most awkward: defence,
   interior and finance). On the democracy front, parliament, which
   includes four small blocks of opposition parties with the Islamists to
   the fore, has lively debates and is making government more
   accountable. A decent constitution for the region is set to enshrine
   an array of rights, including for Christians, Yazidis (a sect of their
   own) and other minorities in Kurdistan.

   Two small but plucky opposition newspapers give an airing to the
   peccadillos of the party duopoly. And even some of the party-owned
   media outlets--for instance, Kurdsat TV, owned and run by Mr
   Talabani's modernising wife, Herro--occasionally broach topics that
   were once taboo.

   Especially compared with the rest of Iraq, Kurdistan has been making
   strides on every front. But this does not mean it will survive as a
   fledgling nation.

   The Iraqi Kurds depend, in the end, on three main things: their
   hardened fighting men, known as the Peshmergas ("those willing to
   die"), technically a "regional protection force" within Iraq; their
   neighbours, especially the Turks; and the mountains ("the Kurds' only
   friends", as their centuries-old saying goes).

   The Peshmergas are probably Iraq's best fighting forces in terms of
   discipline, morale and motivation. According to Jafar Ali Mustafa, the
   Kurds' minister of state for Peshmerga affairs (in fact, the PUK's
   defence boss), they number some 200,000; half are loyal to his union,
   half to the Barzanis' KDP. A merger is proceeding steadily, he says.

   The Kurds' relations with their neighbours are just as critical.
   Turkey, with its 14m-odd Kurds of its own (many of them well
   assimilated) in a population of 75m, has frequently issued threats to
   invade Iraqi Kurdistan and clobber its Kurds if they make a grab for
   Kirkuk, where Turkey considers itself the guarantor of the rights of
   the Turkomans, their ethnic kinsfolk from the days when the area was
   part of the Ottoman empire. It also threatens to invade if Iraq's
   Kurds do not oust or corral the 3,000-plus guerrillas of the Kurdistan
   Workers' Party (PKK), who hide in the remotest mountains of northern
   Iraq, where they plan and train for their lethal operations in
   south-eastern Turkey.

   The Iraqi Kurds consider the PKK a nuisance, but are unlikely to spill
   the blood of their ethnic brothers. They argue, instead, that the
   Turks should negotiate with them. The Iraqi Kurds' leaders may,
   however, turn a blind eye if the PKK is attacked within Iraqi Kurdish
   territory, perhaps even with the complicity of the Americans, who
   sorely need to improve their relations with Turkey, a rare and crucial
   Muslim ally of America in the Middle East. But many rank-and-file
   Kurds would be furious.

   However, the Turks and Iraqi Kurds have been getting on better, as the
   Kurdish government settles down and since Turkey's mildly Islamist
   government was re-elected in July, scoring notably well in Turkey's
   Kurdish areas. Moreover, Turkey is by far the Iraqi Kurds' biggest
   economic partner. Erbil's huge new airport, for instance, is a Turkish
   (and British) project. If Turkey and Iraqi Kurdistan could come to an
   accommodation, which looks more feasible than before, it would vastly
   boost the chances of the latter's survival. To a lesser extent, the
   same goes for the Iraqi Kurds' relations with Iran and Syria, both of
   which are wary of an independent Iraqi Kurdistan but could probably
   live with it.

                                                                      AFP
                                                                      AFP

                                Kurds must plot their next move cunningly

   Iraq's Sunni Arabs and Iraq's other Arab neighbours, mainly Sunni (as
   are most Kurds), both remain deeply hostile to the notion of an
   autonomous, let alone independent, Kurdistan. They see the Kurds as
   destroyers of an Arab nation and bent on undermining the Arabs'
   professed unity on a wider scale. They are enraged by the Kurds'
   refusal to fly the Iraqi flag, and ritually accuse them of being a
   fifth column for Israel and Zionists.

   Without fail, say Kurdish ministers, visiting Arab journalists raise
   both topics. In response, the Kurds point out that several Arab
   countries have relations with Israel. "The chauvinist Arabs always
   call us a second Israel," says Mr Jafar, the Peshmerga leader. He
   denies that Israel and the Kurds have military or intelligence
   contacts. "I wish we did," he says breezily.

   Kurdish leaders are as candid about their desire for the Americans to
   stay on in Iraq or, if they are bound to withdraw, to keep a military
   base in Iraqi Kurdistan as a guarantor of the Kurds' national safety.
   "We'd like the Americans to put their biggest base in Kurdistan," says
   Mr Jafar.

   But the Americans have so far been wary of too warmly embracing the
   Kurds, concentrating instead on trying to reconcile Sunni and Shia
   Arabs in Baghdad. "We love the Americans but they don't love us,"
   Nechirvan Barzani, the Kurds' prime minister, is said recently to have
   sighed.

   Hanging on to what you've got

   Could the Kurds be satisfied with extreme autonomy in northern Iraq?
   An informal referendum in 2005 suggested that 98% of them would like
   outright independence if they could have it. But almost every senior
   Kurd in Iraq says he would accept extreme autonomy--provided there is
   a genuine federation and that the central government in Baghdad gives
   the Kurds a good deal, especially over the management and exploration
   of oil in the north. Getting back Kirkuk means a lot too; conceivably,
   a special deal could be arranged there to leave the city with a status
   of its own.

   Is it possible to feel both Kurdish and Iraqi? A former long-serving
   minister in Iraq's Kurdish government, who is a noted historian,
   barely blinks. "Frankly, no." Then, after a pause, he adds: "If Iraq
   ever became truly democratic, maybe."

   Masrur Barzani, the 38-year-old intelligence chief and possible future
   head of the Barzani clan, recommends a "three-state solution",
   presumably meaning that Iraq, which he calls "the illusion of a
   country that doesn't really exist", should one day be divided into a
   three-way confederation. To most Iraqi Kurds, the emergence of a
   kindly, federal, Arab-run Iraq in which they could have a comfy
   existence is an absurd prospect.

   Briefly after the Ottoman Turks' empire collapsed, the Kurds seemed in
   reach of a homeland of their own--only to be betrayed by the great
   powers, Britain to the fore. Now they are enjoying a golden age of
   not-quite-independence for longer than at any time in their modern
   history. So why would they risk a reversion to a past of subjugation
   by Arabs, Turks or Persians?

   If they are sensible, the Kurds will not rush towards independence. To
   be landlocked and without permanently friendly neighbours is a pretty
   hopeless recipe for statehood. The outside powers on which the Kurds
   ultimately depend, especially Turkey and the United States, would not
   allow them to break away. The Turks could throttle them economically
   if not bash them militarily; the Americans may well turn their backs,
   reckoning that it is strategically more important to curry favour with
   Turks and Arabs.

   But if the Iraqi Kurds can bed down quietly for, say, five or ten
   years, securing their borders, making their economy work, building a
   modicum of freedom if not full-fledged democracy, and staying out of
   the trouble swirling around them in the rest of Iraq, it will be
   increasingly impossible for the rest of the world to ignore their
   patently rightful claim to self-determination. They have at least a
   chance of getting it.

