
   The small gains for democracy are now being rolled back

   TWO years ago, President Hosni Mubarak of Egypt declared that he would
   allow rivals to run against him in the most populous Arab country's
   first open presidential election. This was hailed as another sign that
   political sands were shifting across the Middle East, with power in
   the world's least democratic region at last beginning to pass from
   long-ensconced rulers to their restive subjects. Some even talked of a
   democratic revolution.

   Other signals included the holding of elections in Iraq and Palestine,
   the "Cedar Revolution" that shook Lebanon from Syrian control,
   fairer-than-usual presidential polls in Tunisia, Algeria and Yemen and
   a widening of the political franchise in several Gulf monarchies.
   Voices of dissent grew louder, often via new media such as satellite
   television, even as the Bush administration trumpeted democratisation
   as the surest foil for extremism.

   The sands are still moving, but lately look more like the contents of
   an hourglass that the same old rulers have turned upside-down. Except
   for a few brighter spots, the general trend from Morocco to the
   Persian Gulf has been towards a reinforcement of central control, a
   curtailing of public freedoms, and a fading of hopes for peaceful
   democratic change. Egypt itself, a country that is often seen as an
   Arab bell-wether, provides a useful example.

   The runner-up to Mr Mubarak in the 2005 presidential election, Ayman
   Nour, languishes in prison, charged with forgery. The Muslim
   Brotherhood, which proved its potency as Egypt's main opposition by
   capturing a fifth of parliamentary seats that year, remains officially
   unrecognised. Government harassment of the group, which claims to want
   an Islamic form of democracy, has intensified, with hundreds of
   members arrested and dozens awaiting trial before military tribunals.

   Mr Mubarak's government is meanwhile pushing ahead with plans to
   "modernise" Egypt's 1971 constitution. It is true that the changes
   would abolish outdated verbiage describing Egypt as a socialist state.
   But they would also formally ban all parties based on religion, so, in
   theory, shutting out the Muslim Brotherhood for good. Judicial
   oversight of elections would be replaced by a government-appointed
   panel and special powers of arrest and eaves-dropping that the police
   now enjoy under 26-year-old emergency laws would be formally enshrined
   in the constitution. Small wonder that Egypt's secular and religious
   opposition, in a rare show of unity, have joined in condemning the
   reforms as a sham.

   The pattern of regression is similar elsewhere. After long debate,
   Jordan's parliament has approved a press law that allows journalists
   to be jailed for vaguely defined forms of slander. Similar laws have
   led to lengthy sentences for journalists in Yemen and Algeria as well
   as internet bloggers in Tunisia and Egypt. Last month, Saudi Arabia
   arrested ten intellectuals for signing a polite petition suggesting it
   was time for the kingdom to consider a transition to constitutional
   monarchy.

   Darker dictatorships, such as those in Syria and Libya, never offered
   much hope of change in the first place, and continue to silence
   dissent with gusto. But countries that seemed to offer brighter
   prospects have also disappointed. Bahrain, a small, relatively
   progressive island kingdom in the Gulf, had promised that last
   November's legislative elections would herald a new era of trust
   between the disgruntled Shia majority and the ruling family's Sunni
   allies. But electoral rules again diluted Shia votes; with opposition
   activists facing renewed harassment since the voting, unrest has again
   spread. People-power in Lebanon, the most politically open Arab
   country, did succeed in installing a reform-minded government. But
   subsequent turmoil, including last summer's war that Hizbullah sparked
   with Israel, has produced such severe political polarisation that many
   Lebanese fear the country is sliding away from the rule of law and
   back into the vicious tribalism of its 1975-90 civil war.

   Given the messy outcomes produced by more open politics in Iraq,
   Palestine and Lebanon, the region's stability-obsessed regimes have
   had reason to take pause. Yet they are not the only ones to have
   developed cold feet. Despite the fact that America's State Department,
   in its recently released annual report on human rights, contained
   harsh words about American allies such as Saudi Arabia and Jordan, the
   tone of America's rhetoric about democratisation has grown markedly
   milder of late. Worried more by the Iraqi quagmire, the perceived
   threat of Iran and evidence of increased support for Islamist parties
   that are assumed to be hostile to the West, American diplomacy appears
   to have dropped idealism in favour of realism. Instead of bullying its
   friends, America has quietly proffered rewards, including, for
   example, assistance in developing civilian nuclear energy for Egypt
   and Libya.

