
   Why George Bush, touring the Middle East this week, is finding the
   Arabs in a gloomy mood

   IT IS not easy to be an Arab these days. If you are old, the place
   where you live is likely to have changed so much that little seems
   friendly and familiar. If you are young, years of rote learning in
   dreary state schools did not prepare you well for this new world. In
   your own country you have few rights. Travel abroad and they take you
   for a terrorist. Even your leaders don't count for much in the wider
   world. Some are big on money, others on bombast, but few are inspiring
   or visionary.

                                                                  Reuters
                                                                  Reuters

   These are gross generalisations, of course. Huge differences persist
   among 300m-odd Arabic speakers and 22 countries of the Arab League.
   With oil prices touching record highs, some Arab economies are
   booming. The gulf between a Darfuri refugee and a Porsche-driving
   financier in Dubai is as great as between any two people on earth. Yet
   to travel through the Arab world right now is to experience a peculiar
   sameness of spirit. Particularly among people under 30, who make up
   the vast majority of Arabs, the mood is one of disgruntlement and
   doubt.

   Factors that contribute to the gloom include the discombobulating
   impact of one of the world's fastest population growth rates, failing
   public-education systems and the resilience of social traditions often
   ill-suited to the urban lifestyle that is now the Arab norm. But it is
   politics above all that shapes this generation's discontent.

   In the world at large, things have not looked good for the Arabs for a
   long time. The generation that emerged after the second world war came
   to believe in the inevitability of an Arab renaissance after centuries
   of domination by Ottoman Turks and European imperialists. Within this
   scheme of Arab progress, the problem of Palestine stuck out like a
   troublesome nail. Defeat in the 1967 war with Israel shattered many
   dreams. Yet even after Israel's victory Palestine remained a
   touchstone for Arabs everywhere. Sooner or later, it was felt, justice
   would be done.

   That confidence has taken a beating of late. Few Arabs expect the
   peace initiative George Bush launched in Annapolis last November to
   achieve anything. And the schism between Hamas and Fatah has shaken
   underlying assumptions. If the Palestinians cannot unite in their own
   cause, why should other Arabs help them? And which side to support?
   For fellow Arabs, as for Palestinians themselves, the clash between a
   heart that cries "resist" and a head that counsels compromise has
   seldom been more perplexing.

   As in Palestine, so in Iraq. In 2003 America's invasion produced all
   but universal Arab outrage. From afar, Iraqi "resistance" looked both
   natural and noble. But as Iraq has grown messier, the rights and
   wrongs have grown harder for Arabs to disentangle. There are few
   heroes in a cast that includes mass killers from al-Qaeda, brutal Shia
   militias, criminal gangs, Kurdish separatists and corrupt politicians
   as well as the American occupiers.

   Elsewhere in the region, it has become harder for thoughtful Arabs to
   blame the government-inspired slaughter in the Darfur region of Sudan
   or the stalemate between Lebanon's religious sects on a nefarious
   American foreign policy. Many Arabs still see Mr Bush's "war on
   terrorism" as a crusade against Islam. But many also note that
   al-Qaeda-style jihadism has killed more Muslims, from Morocco to Saudi
   Arabia to the squalid Palestinian refugee camps of Lebanon, than
   "infidels".

   In past decades, Arabs looked to leaders for guidance. Egypt's Gamal
   Abdel Nasser and Anwar Sadat, Tunisia's modernising secularist, Habib
   Bourguiba, and Kings Hussein of Jordan, Hassan II of Morocco and
   Faisal of Saudi Arabia were all flawed men. Yet they, and even
   monsters such as Saddam Hussein and Hafez Assad, enjoyed some popular
   appeal as nation-builders. Most of today's leaders, by contrast, lack
   an inspirational project. Nor is any single country a natural leader
   of the Arabs. Egypt under the 26-year-long rule of Hosni Mubarak is no
   longer the champion of "Arabism". Saudi Arabia has vast oil wealth but
   a mixed record in diplomacy: its attempt last year to reconcile Fatah
   and Hamas unravelled with humiliating speed.

   It may be a good thing that the personality-based leadership of the
   1960s and 1970s has fallen out of fashion. Unfortunately, it has not
   been replaced by more institutionally-based systems of rule, let
   alone--for all the aid and speechifying of Western do-gooders--by
   democracy. Elections are more frequent and opposition parties and the
   press somewhat freer. But this is often a case of adopting the outward
   shape of reform without the substance. Regimes point to the existence
   of parliaments, while hiding the tricks used to pack them with friends
   and exclude real opposition. They can trumpet privatisation programmes
   that reduce the role of the state, while obscuring the fact that many
   of the beneficiaries are regime cronies.

   The marginally freer press makes for more colourful news-stands. But
   some opening was probably inescapable, due to the impact of
   hard-to-block new media, via satellites and the internet. Governments
   have simply switched from absolute control of information, for example
   through state television monopolies, to enacting laws that criminalise
   "spreading false information" or "disrespecting state institutions".
   The supposedly liberalising, pro-Western governments of Morocco,
   Jordan, Tunisia and Egypt have all used such means to stifle dissent.
   Syria under Hafez Assad used to hurl dissidents into prison without
   much ado. His "modernising" son Bashar has them tried first. But they
   still end up in the slammer.

   Stratagems such as these suck the vitality out of politics. Morocco is
   one of the bolder Arab reformers. Yet despite rising prosperity, a
   relatively free press and multi-party elections, Moroccans have grown
   increasingly sceptical of a political process that remains tightly, if
   elegantly, circumscribed. As a result, voter turnout has steadily
   declined over the past two decades. In Egypt, fewer than one in ten
   voters bothered to turn out for recent polls.

   Political scientists have long blamed oil wealth--and the rentier
   economy that so often goes along with it--for the survival of Arab
   authoritarianism. No taxation without representation, said America's
   revolutionaries. Arab governments have inverted this refrain: by
   appropriating national energy resources and other rents, they neatly
   absolve themselves of the need to levy heavy taxes and therefore to
   win the consent of the governed.

   The devil you know

   A less obvious source of state power is a pervasive fear of what might
   happen in its absence. In many Arab countries loyalty to the state is
   weaker than loyalty to a sub-grouping based on kinship, ethnicity,
   religion or region. This is hardly a unique problem; many successful
   democracies still struggle with it. But Muslims have, in addition, yet
   to resolve the essential question of whether laws should emanate from
   the people or from God (see [3]article).

   Such points may seem abstract but they have practical consequences. In
   most Arab countries, regimes hold power by virtue of tradition or
   through military-backed movements that claim to represent the will of
   the masses. Where top-down authority collapses, as it did in
   post-Saddam Iraq or in the Palestinian territories after Arafat, it
   has been very hard for bottom-up politics to repair the damage.

   In such circumstances, it is not surprising that people prefer the
   devil they know to the fitna (communal strife) or fawda (chaos) that
   seem all too likely to replace it. This makes Arabs suspicious not
   just of Western advocates of democracy but also of parties such as the
   Muslim Brotherhood, which advocate change in the name of Islam. It is
   instructive to note that when such movements are confronted with
   bread-and-butter issues they tend to split between pragmatists and
   ideologues, leaving supporters befuddled. Even Egypt's highly
   disciplined Muslim Brothers, for example, are riven by tensions
   between older hardliners and younger liberals.

   The bleakness of political prospects is only one aspect of the current
   Arab malaise. The rigid social structures and strong family ties that
   form part of the cohesive strength of Arab societies have negative
   consequences too. Sex out of wedlock remains taboo, yet the cost of
   lavish weddings, hefty dowry payments and the bridal requirement of a
   furnished, paid-for home have pushed the average age of marriage in
   many Arab countries into the 30s. The resulting frustration is an
   underlying cause of troubles from youth delinquency to religious
   extremism. Paternalistic social norms hold women back, even though
   their legal status is improving.

   Let them learn about the world

   Much fanfare has surrounded the release, over the past few years, of a
   series of UN-sponsored reports on human development painting a picture
   of Arab shortcomings that range from women's treatment to the feeble
   trickle of translation into Arabic of new knowledge. An oft-quoted
   statistic from the reports is that the amount of literature translated
   into Spanish in a single year exceeds the entire corpus of what has
   been translated into Arabic in 1,000 years.

   If there is a common thread in many of these failings, it is poor
   education. Studies show a strong link between levels of schooling and
   attitudes to women's rights. Harder to prove, but equally valid by
   anecdotal evidence, is a link between breadth of reading and tolerance
   of diversity. Religious texts still out-sell every other form of
   literature in most Arab countries. This may promote punctilious
   practice of the faith, but hardly equips people for a bewildering
   world of ever-increasing choice.

   Although the proportion of Arabs with university degrees is growing
   rapidly, quality lags far behind. An annual ranking of the world's top
   500 universities, compiled by Shanghai's Jiao Tong University,
   includes only one Arab institution compared with seven universities in
   tiny Israel.

   Some Arab governments are at last responding. Qatar and Saudi Arabia
   have hired well-known consulting firms to revamp public-school systems
   designed in the 1950s. Even Syria has relaxed the state monopoly of
   higher education. Private universities are flourishing everywhere,
   sometimes with generous state aid. Dubai's Sheikh Muhammad Maktoum has
   pledged $10 billion to create a foundation to advance knowledge. Saudi
   Arabia has committed some $3 billion to build what officials promise
   will be a world-class postgraduate institute that will be beyond the
   supervision of the religiously conservative education ministry, and
   where men and women will be allowed to mingle.

   Another cause for hope, just now, is the rapid growth of most Arab
   economies. For each of the past six years the Arab world has, by some
   estimates, grown faster by at least a percentage point than the world
   as a whole. Record oil prices have helped a lot. So has demography:
   birth-rates are falling after a period of high growth, increasing the
   proportion of wage earners to dependants. This has boosted consumer
   industries, as have reforms to ease investment and trade. Give me five
   more years of 7% growth, one Egyptian minister is fond of saying, and
   many of our other problems will fade. Maybe.

