
   The people are watching the new president to see which way he will go


   DESPITE the stench of April's elections, described by many observers
   as the most fraudulent they had ever witnessed, the new president,
   Umaru Yar'Adua, has been enjoying a honeymoon with the Nigerian
   electorate. For a country that has known little but corrupt military
   or civilian rule in the past 40 years or more, Mr Yar'Adua at least
   looks and sounds different. But now Nigerians are waiting for him to
   take the harder decisions that alone may sort out some of their
   country's more intractable problems. Only then will they be able to
   tell if he is truly up to the job.

                                                                       AP
                                                                       AP

                                              How much time does he have?

   The "servant leader", as he styles himself, has made a fair start,
   even if it amounts so far mainly to promises and gestures. Mr Yar'Adua
   has announced several plans to boost Nigeria's economy, root out
   corruption, get the power-grid working again and stem the rising
   violence in the Niger Delta region and elsewhere. He has avoided
   meddling in a corruption scandal in the National Assembly, as his
   predecessors might have done, leaving the legislature's committees to
   sort it out. And, just as significantly, he has refused to intervene
   on behalf of former state governors from his own party who have been
   indicted by the country's anti-corruption agency. The tribunals set up
   to challenge the election results have also been allowed to operate
   freely; on October 10th, one called for fresh elections in Kogi state.

   The economy is in better shape too. It is growing at about 6% a year,
   while inflation is down to single figures, about four times less than
   the rate in 2000. Better fiscal management has meant more foreign
   currency in the banks and more foreign investment. Nigeria is now the
   32nd most corrupt nation in the world, according to a Berlin-based
   anti-corruption watchdog, Transparency International, down from the
   top spot in 2000: progress of sorts.

   Yet Nigerians know that enormous problems persist; their patience may
   soon run out. In the Niger Delta, the biggest militant group, the
   Movement for the Emancipation of the Niger Delta, declared a ceasefire
   for a few months after Mr Yar'Adua took office. But last month it
   returned to its customary kidnappings and sabotage. Moreover, the
   violence has got nastier and more indiscriminate. The kidnappers have
   begun to nab children, as well as foreign oil workers, politicians and
   ordinary Nigerians. To flush the militants out of the creeks, the new
   vice-president, Jonathan Goodluck, a local man, has begun meeting
   representatives of the various Delta groups. But peace still seems a
   long way off.

   The increasing violence stretches far beyond the Delta. A report by
   Human Rights Watch, a New York-based lobby group, details how
   political parties armed rival gangs to rig elections and intimidate
   voters in 2003 and again this year. Many of the politicians have
   failed to cough up for those services, so the gangs have been venting
   their frustration on the streets.

   Despite being Africa's largest oil producer, Nigeria still fails to
   provide enough power for its own people. Electricity is sporadic in
   towns and almost non-existent in the countryside. A closet industry of
   private generators fills the gap at a price sometimes ten times that
   of state-generated power. The president created a National Energy
   Council last month and told it to come up with a plan to solve the
   power crisis in six months. But he himself seems to have few firm
   ideas how to do it.

   One constraint on Mr Yar'Adua is that most of the revenue from
   Nigeria's oil goes to the 36 states, which are then meant to provide
   the desperate people with their local services. These local
   governments are often the most corrupt. So the president will have to
   find a way of ensuring that the huge sums of money available actually
   reach the people--for instance, in the Delta. To do that, he will have
   to free himself of the political networks and alliances that he
   inherited from previous administrations and which still ensnare the
   country. Nigerians are waiting to see which way he will move.

