
   The Kurds say they still want more of it 


   THIS week's death sentence on Ali Hassan al-Majid, architect of the
   Anfal (Spoils) campaign in 1987-1988 against Iraq's Kurds, of whom up
   to 180,000 may have been killed, does not mark the end of the affair.
   After months of evidence of gassing, deportations and mass graves,
   Iraq's special tribunal found "Chemical Ali", as Saddam Hussein's
   cousin is more widely known, guilty of various heinous crimes,
   including, most significantly for the Kurds, genocide. But Nechirvan
   Barzani, prime minister of Iraq's Kurdistan region, said that the
   tribunal's definition of the Anfal as a genocide was just a first step
   in a new campaign to have that military operation recognised as a
   genocide by the rest of the Arab world as well as by international
   bodies such as the UN.

   The Kurds have long sought such recognition for the Anfal as well as
   separate acknowledgement for the crime of the gas attack on the town
   of Halabja, where 5,000-odd people were killed in 1988. In the
   mid-1990s a New York-based lobby, Human Rights Watch (HRW), which
   documented the Anfal crimes, including the razing of 3,000-plus
   Kurdish villages, tried to bring the issue before the UN Security
   Council. But too few big countries backed the move.

   This week's decision by the Iraqi court is unlikely to give the Kurds
   the momentum they need: many outsiders question the independence and
   fairness of the special tribunal in Baghdad. And it is unclear how
   much support Iraq's Kurds would get from their Arab compatriots in a
   campaign to win recognition of those mass crimes. Many of Iraq's Sunni
   Arabs say privately that the Kurds deserved what they got because
   their fighters sided with Iran in the war with Iraq in the 1980s--an
   argument used by Mr Majid in the trial just ended.

   In the early 1990s Kanan Makiya, an Iraqi Shia Arab, in a book called
   "Cruelty and Silence", lambasted Arab politicians and intellectuals in
   the region for their silence about the regime's brutalities. This
   week's reaction, muttered the Kurds, was not so different. Pan-Arab
   satellite television channels covered the trial and its verdict
   widely. But its commentators and those in Arab newspapers dwelt little
   on the mass murders for which Mr Majid was condemned.

