
   How not to run a police force

                                                                      EPA
                                                                      EPA

                                       Selebi and the pointing of fingers


   IT SEEMS, for the moment, as if South Africa's governing class is
   being engulfed by charges of corruption. Three weeks ago it was the
   turn of Jacob Zuma, the newly elected leader of the ruling African
   National Congress (ANC). He was charged with fraud, tax evasion and
   money laundering and is due in court in August. This week it was the
   turn of Jackie Selebi, the head of the police. The National
   Prosecuting Authority says it will charge him with corruption and
   "defeating the ends of justice". He has been suspended from his job
   and he also resigned as head of Interpol, the international police
   body. On January 8th the police also arrested Gerrie Nel, a senior
   member of a special investigations unit known as the Scorpions, also
   on charges of corruption. He is the man who had led the investigation
   into Mr Selebi. All the charges against Mr Nel, however, were dropped
   a week later.

   All these cases point to an unduly incestuous relationship between the
   politicians and the country's supposedly independent security
   apparatus. They also illustrate the way in which the acrimonious
   battle for power between Mr Zuma and Thabo Mbeki, the country's
   president whom he defeated in December's ANC leadership election, is
   poisoning both the civil service and the political system.

   Mr Selebi is Mr Mbeki's man, and the president has discredited himself
   by defending his friend too doggedly. Months ago Mr Selebi admitted to
   being a friend of Glen Agliotti, a drug trafficker who was implicated
   in the murder in 2005 of a shady mining magnate. When faced with angry
   public calls to replace Mr Selebi, Mr Mbeki merely asked South
   Africans to trust him. The prosecuting authority's new allegations are
   particularly damaging. It says that as well as handing out bags of
   cash to Mr Selebi, Mr Agliotti also paid for some of the police
   chief's shopping. In return, Mr Selebi protected Mr Agliotti's friends
   and shared confidential documents with him. The police chief denies
   all the charges.

   The prosecuting authority, already accused of abusing its power to
   settle scores against Mr Zuma, has itself been caught in the
   crossfire, as have the Scorpions, who report to it. In September Vusi
   Pikoli, the national prosecutor, was suspended as he was poised to
   arrest Mr Selebi. Mr Mbeki said this was due to a breakdown in Mr
   Pikoli's relations with his boss, the justice minister. But the timing
   of Mr Pikoli's fall fed suspicions that he was in fact being punished
   for going after Mr Selebi.

   Mr Nel's arrest was seen by some as retaliation by Mr Selebi's force
   against the Scorpions, since they had helped bring the charges against
   Mr Selebi. That the charges against Mr Nel were dropped so fast
   suggests that they were pretty spurious in the first place. The
   episode will only deepen the bitter rivalry between the Scorpions and
   the regular police.

   This murky sort of business would scandalise any country. But in one
   plagued by some of the highest levels of violent crime in the world,
   it is tragic that South Africa's law-enforcement officials should
   expend so much energy fighting each other rather than the criminals.
   The police judged that they needed no fewer than 20 armed officers to
   arrest Mr Nel at his home. On the hopeful side, the charges against Mr
   Selebi show that no one yet is above the law. But if they turn out to
   be true, it will further reduce confidence in a police force that is
   often perceived, at best, as merely incompetent.

