
                                                                  Reuters

                                  Reuters

   Zimbabweans opt for hardship in South Africa rather than hopelessness
   at home


   ON A dirt road in Weipe, a farming area in South Africa on the banks
   of the Limpopo river about 60km (37 miles) west of the busy Beitbridge
   border post, a few cars are waiting. Unemployed South Africans try to
   make a bit of money driving Zimbabweans--either locally employed or
   freshly arrived from across the river--wherever they want to go. But
   business is hard, as many new immigrants have no money. And there is
   also the risk of being arrested by the police for transporting people
   without visas.

   When a police car duly arrives, the few bystanders hoping for a ride
   quickly vanish into the bush. Two friendly policemen stop the vehicles
   driving past, checking the passengers' papers. Six illegal Zimbabweans
   are picked up and ushered into the police car. They will be driven to
   the military base south of Musina, the nearby town, and deported
   within 24 hours.

   Nick van der Vyver, who heads the office of the Geneva-based
   International Organisation for Migration on the Zimbabwean side of
   Beitbridge, says that so far this year an average of about 570
   deported Zimbabweans cross his threshold every day. The figure is
   higher than last year's, and is probably far smaller than the number
   of those who do not get caught. Of those who do, most will probably be
   back on the South African side of the border within a few days;
   sealing over 200km of border is almost impossible. They add to the
   thousands who cross legally, in both directions.

   The numbers say much about the desperation and determination of the
   impoverished Zimbabweans fleeing a country that is collapsing around
   them. Over 3m Zimbabweans are thought to have left their homeland (out
   of a population of 13m), most of them for South Africa. It is there
   that many already have friends or relations and where the economic
   opportunities are presumed to be best. But these emigrants are now
   causing problems far beyond the border.

   At this time of year the Limpopo is dry, making it easy to cross by
   foot. But in the rainy season Zimbabweans dreaming of a better life
   drown in the surging waters, or are occasionally killed by crocodiles.
   Almost as dangerous are those who offer to help them cross for money:
   they often rob them blind or worse.

   And crossing the border is only the beginning of their problems. Once
   they are in South Africa, making a living is hard. Some find jobs on
   farms, with minimum monthly salaries of about 1,000 rand ($142): not
   much, but still more than ten times a teacher's salary in Zimbabwe at
   the unofficial exchange rate. Many professionals, unable to survive at
   home with 80% unemployment, inflation heading for 100,000% (according
   to the IMF) and severe shortages of basic items such as meat, sugar
   and cooking oil, are also coming over. An association of Zimbabwean
   teachers in Johannesburg tries to help its 3,500 members with papers,
   professional certification, advice and jobs. Doctor Ncube, the
   chairman, believes there are over 10,000 Zimbabwean teachers in South
   Africa.

   Limkani, who once taught in a secondary school in Matabeleland, hauled
   boxes in a warehouse for 75 rand a day when he came to South Africa in
   2005. Another high-school teacher speaks of the one-bedroom flat he
   shares with seven others. His work permit means he is among the lucky
   ones. But he is struggling to win certification as a teacher in South
   Africa: he needs a letter from the Zimbabwean authorities, which say
   they have no stationery.

   Many cannot even afford housing. In central Johannesburg the Methodist
   church has become a refuge for about 1,000 people, most of them
   Zimbabweans. At night the building bursts with people sleeping on
   every inch of floor; all must share just six lavatories. A Zimbabwean
   salesman has been living there for about a year. He finds occasional
   jobs as a security guard for 70 rand a day. Like most Zimbabweans in
   South Africa, he sends groceries and money home to his wife and
   children whenever he can.

   The vast majority leave Zimbabwe because they cannot make ends meet.
   But some are escaping political persecution. Pianos, a 43-year-old
   official of the opposition Movement for Democratic Change (MDC), shows
   multiple scars on his face, legs and knees from the beatings he says
   he received from the police and pro-government youth militia. He fled
   after an opposition gathering on March 11th, during which MDC leaders
   were arrested and later beaten up. He is now hoping to obtain
   political asylum. But, even if successful, this will take years--and
   his wife and four of his children remain in Zimbabwe.

   Many Zimbabweans say they will go back if things improve at home. In
   the meantime, though, Zimbabwe is losing its people and South Africa
   has a problem on its hands. With an unemployment rate of 26%, or
   closer to 40% by some measures, it can hardly absorb the flow. Some
   locals feel that Zimbabweans are competing for scarce jobs and adding
   to the crime rate, although there is no hard evidence to support this.
   The opposition Democratic Alliance wants refugee camps set up; the
   government disagrees, saying that most Zimbabweans are economic
   migrants, not refugees.

   South Africa's government has been heavily criticised for not doing
   more to hasten the end of President Robert Mugabe's disastrous regime.
   One of its excuses for not pushing harder has been fear of
   precipitating a crisis in Zimbabwe that would adversely affect South
   Africa. But it is hard to escape the conclusion that the damage is
   already being done.

