
   Israelis are enjoying calm and prosperity but worried about the future

   THIS May, Israelis will look back over their country's 60 years of
   history with mixed feelings. To be sure, they (or their parents and
   grandparents) built a state from scratch, and it has prospered
   relative to its neighbours. Israel's GDP per head is around four times
   bigger, at purchasing-power parity, than the Arab world's, even
   including the oil-rich Gulf states, and the country has changed a lot
   more too. Almost gone are national stereotypes like the sunburned,
   sandalled kibbutznik and the family at Tel Aviv's airport arguing with
   a customs official over a mountain of foreign-bought gadgets and
   gifts; they can now buy most of the same stuff at home, even if it
   still costs a bit more.

   Israel has also bounced back from the Palestinians' second intifada,
   which began in 2000 and has gradually died down. The barrier being
   built in the West Bank and an aggressive strategy against Palestinian
   militants have helped, along with a truce, to make suicide bombings a
   rarity. Though a constant drizzle of home-made rockets fired from Gaza
   keeps the residents of nearby Israeli towns living in fear, most other
   Israelis just shrug.

   But although they find the present quite comfortable, it is a long
   time since they felt so unsure about the future. Few expect peace with
   the Palestinians. Tough security measures may keep the human cost to
   Israel down, but more Israelis now realise that their mighty army, so
   good at fighting conventional battles, has no answer to the rockets
   from Gaza or to Hizbullah's well-equipped guerrillas across the border
   in Lebanon, should another war break out like the one in 2006.
   Security hawks alarm Israelis with the prospect of an Iranian nuclear
   bomb as the first real existential threat in Israel's history.
   Israelis with a European parent or grandparent who never thought of
   leaving before have been taking out second passports--just in case.

   They also disagree more and more about what kind of country they want
   to live in. Arab Israelis, a fifth of the citizenry, are reacting to
   decades of discrimination by demanding more rights and recognition as
   a minority. Few feel that the 60th anniversary of the state whose
   birth marked their separation from other Palestinians will be anything
   to celebrate.

   But divisions are widening among Jews too. As the religious population
   expands and a younger, more fundamentalist religious generation comes
   of age, secular and religious Jews are becoming more segregated in
   some areas. Some secular Jews fear becoming a minority. And
   secular-religious conflicts over what the Jewish nature of the state
   should be, as well as what to do with the territories occupied since
   1967, have become ever fiercer.

