
                                                                      EPA

                                    EPA

   After a stolen election, ethnic cleansing and even the threat of civil
   war


   THE decision to return Kenya's 76-year-old incumbent president, Mwai
   Kibaki, to office was not made by the Kenyan people but by a small
   group of hardline leaders from Mr Kibaki's Kikuyu tribe. They made up
   their minds before the result was announced, perhaps even before the
   opposition candidate, Raila Odinga, had opened up a lead in early
   returns from the December 27th election. It was a civil coup.

   The planning was meticulous. All that was needed were the extra votes
   to squeak past Mr Odinga in what had been among the most closely
   contested elections Africa had ever seen. That was why returns from
   Central Province, Mr Kibaki's fiercely loyal Kikuyu heartland, were
   inexplicably held back. It was why, in some constituencies, a large
   number of voters seemed mysteriously to vote only in the presidential
   race and ignore the parliamentary ballot--despite waiting hours in the
   blazing sun. But the real damage was done in Nairobi, by simply
   crossing out the number of votes as announced in the constituency and
   scribbling in a higher number. Election monitors were turned away
   while the tallying went on. Monitors from the European Union saw tens
   of thousands of votes pinched in this way.

   Mr Odinga's supporters were not innocent either. There were
   irregularities in his home province of Nyanza. Still, it was the
   meddling in Central Province that was decisive. Officially, Mr Kibaki
   won 4.58m votes to Mr Odinga's 4.35m. A third candidate, Kalonzo
   Musyoka, won 880,000 votes. Unofficially, Mr Odinga may have won,
   albeit by a similarly narrow margin.

   The tragedy for Kenya, and what threatens to rip the nation apart, is
   that no one will know for sure. The EU's preliminary report on the
   election was scathing. Although the parliamentary election had gone
   off well, the European observers said the presidential one had fallen
   short of "international standards".

   The role of the electoral commission was particularly dodgy. On the
   afternoon of December 30th its head, Samuel Kivuitu, declared Mr
   Kibaki president. The news went out only on KBC, the state
   broadcaster. Other camera crews were led out of the building. The
   security forces sealed off the city centre against the angry poor,
   most of whom had voted for Mr Odinga. A few minutes later, in the
   twilight, Mr Kibaki was sworn in as president at the State House. In
   contrast to Mr Kibaki's first term, when the inauguration took place
   in a stadium heaving with jubilant supporters, there were no
   dignitaries or diplomats, just a few dozen loyalists and civil
   servants. Some questioned whether in fact the whole event had been
   staged earlier and pre-recorded.

   The reaction to the swearing-in was immediate. Nairobi's slums
   exploded in rage. The poor killed each other. Across the country came
   a swelling up of tribal violence, sometimes Kikuyu against Mr Odinga's
   Luo tribe, more often Luo and other tribes against Kikuyu. Hundreds
   have been killed so far and 80,000 displaced. Gang rapes and
   mutilations are widespread. Police have orders to shoot to kill. There
   has been looting in Kisumu, riots in Mombasa and pitched battles in
   Eldoret (see map). Kikuyu hiding in a church near Eldoret were burned
   alive by a mob.

   Taken together, this amounts to a pulling apart of Kenya's rich
   national fabric. Some 97% of Kikuyu voted for Mr Kibaki. Everywhere
   else he was trounced. Muslims, for instance, voted against Mr Kibaki
   by 70% or more. The Kikuyu highlands encircling the glaciers of Mount
   Kenya increasingly feel like a state within a state. The division is
   even more troubling when the parliamentary vote is taken into account.
   Mr Kibaki lost half his cabinet, including his vice-president, as well
   as a large number of seemingly unassailable members of parliament.
   This government may find it impossible to pass a budget.

   The hardliners' instincts will be to use the security services to
   reverse the freedoms of Mr Kibaki's first term--anything to avoid
   power slipping into Mr Odinga's hands. But Kenyans may not stand for
   this. The government pressured the country's mobile-phone operators to
   suspend text messages for "security reasons", without success. The
   army's strong apolitical tradition, with staff officers drawn from
   several tribes, looks to be holding.

   Mr Odinga is demanding Mr Kibaki's resignation. He is calling for a
   campaign of civil action, peaceable, but determined. On January 3rd
   thousands of opposition supporters tried to converge on the centre of
   Nairobi for a protest rally but were dispersed by the police. Later
   the same day Mr Kibaki said, for the first time, that he was willing
   to talk to the opposition "once the nation is calm".

   The expectations of the Luo and other tribes who consider themselves
   marginalised will have to be addressed, and soon. With 38m people,
   half of them under 20, Kenya's economy has to create several hundred
   thousand jobs this year just to stand still. But investment will be
   hit by the violence, as will vital tourism revenues.

   The EU had at first been reluctant to send observers, arguing that
   resources for Africa were slim and Kenya was "too stable". During the
   orderly voting, the mission did indeed look like an extravagance. A
   week later the country was teetering on the brink of civil war. A
   chastened Mr Kivuitu now says he is not sure Mr Kibaki won the
   election. The Americans and the British have been twisting arms, as
   has the African Union's head, John Kufuor. Well-connected Kikuyu
   business leaders are trying to persuade Mr Kibaki to give in and form
   a government of national unity. In the meantime, Kenya burns.

