
   Ordinary Zimbabweans find creative ways to survive

                                                                  Reuters

                                  Reuters


   AT FIRST glance, life in Harare appears surprisingly normal. Cars
   still cruise along the streets, shops are still open, children wear
   neat school uniforms, and men and women in suits still talk on mobile
   phones. Yet in Zimbabwe appearances are deceptive. The economy is
   collapsing. Eight in ten people have no formal jobs; inflation,
   officially estimated at more than 3,700%, may actually be twice as
   high.

   So President Robert Mugabe has decided to try to do something about
   the galloping prices of basic goods. Ignoring protests from Gideon
   Gono, the governor of the central bank, Mr Mugabe, who famously
   despises "bookish economics", has sent the police in to order
   shopkeepers to slash their prices, forcing them to sell at a loss. The
   predictable result is huge crowds waiting outside shops to rush in and
   grab whatever they can while the going is good. Factories are
   threatened with being taken over if they stop production. Hundreds of
   shopkeepers have been arrested, accused of not lowering their prices
   enough.

   So basic goods such as cooking oil, soap and meat have disappeared
   from the shelves. At a supermarket in the Fife Avenue shopping centre,
   expensive imported goods are still on sale but the meat counter is
   empty and there is no bread. Luckily, there is a bit of cooking oil.
   Each bottle costs about one-third of a teacher's monthly wage and
   shoppers are allowed to buy only two bottles each. A woman pushing a
   trolley says she spends a good part of the day going from shop to shop
   to find basic items such as sugar or flour.

   Petrol, which was expensive but available after private importers were
   licensed, has now dried up as well, thanks to the enforced price cuts.
   At a petrol station in one of Harare's leafy suburbs, a line of over
   80 cars snakes around the block, overseen by a few policemen and
   soldiers. Without much petrol, public transport, whose fares have also
   been slashed, has become too scarce for commuters. On one of Harare's
   main avenues, crowds wait by the side of the road at night, hoping for
   a ride home. Some people run after a pick-up truck that is already
   full, trying to jump on. It can take hours to get to work in the
   morning.

   Yet most things are available on the black market--for those who can
   afford them. At night, you only have to drive to the right spot and
   young men rush over to offer petrol at more than eight times the
   official price. In the poor district of Mbare, about 3km (two miles or
   so) from Harare's centre, a few people are selling cooking oil and
   sugar at the side of the road; some carry bags of maize flour on their
   heads. But police raids this week have pushed this black market even
   further underground.

   Twenty kilometres outside Harare, a 40-year-old teacher explains that
   she cannot survive on her monthly earnings of 1.9m Zimbabwean dollars,
   equivalent to $7,600 at the official exchange rate but only $7.60 on
   the black market. Her husband makes even less. She walks 5km to work
   every day only "because there is nothing else to do", but some of her
   colleagues no longer show up at all. She grows vegetables in her back
   yard; the greens, she says, are "our chicken and our pork, our eggs
   and our beef".

   Scraping by

   There is no running water for most of the day, so she fills buckets
   and bottles whenever taps work and has to boil the water as it is no
   longer safe to drink. Electricity is also scarce, so she cooks on a
   wood fire in her back yard and buys candles whenever she can afford
   to. She wears a worn-out anorak and woollen hat in her small house, as
   she cannot afford heating to fight the biting winter cold. To feed and
   school her three children, she borrows money to buy a few things, then
   goes to South Africa or Zambia to sell them.

   Many people survive by trading. A 34-year-old professional, who has
   left his job to become a middleman, buys foreign exchange on the black
   market and imports all kinds of stuff, from IT equipment to
   stationery. He then resells at a fat mark-up to local companies that
   cannot risk breaking the foreign-exchange laws. When not driving to
   South Africa, he lounges in his drawing room watching satellite
   television on a wide screen. He says he makes a profit of more than
   $5,000 a month; he lives in a nice residential area where electricity
   and water are always on.

   There is plenty of foreign exchange, he explains. The lucky few with
   access to American dollars at the official rate of 250 Zimbabwe
   dollars to one American greenback are making a killing selling them on
   the black market, where the rate is about 250,000. Getting enough
   local cash has become the main hurdle since restrictions were placed
   on withdrawals. To get around the Z$1.5m daily limit, people open
   multiple bank accounts or pay a 10% premium to get cash against a bank
   transfer.

   Choked by hyperinflation and arbitrary restrictions, people have
   become increasingly creative to survive. More than 3m have emigrated,
   mainly to South Africa, while a small elite bleeds the economy dry. A
   local businessman says the system will collapse in six months--and
   that Zimbabwe, under new management, will become Africa's fastest
   growing economy. "Then again", he smiles, "we have been saying this
   for years."

