
   More dissent in the ruling party and in the army does not mean the end
   is nigh

                                                                      AFP

                                    AFP

                    Can he trust his soldiers any more?


   THE political temperature in Zimbabwe may be rising again. Last week
   seven men, including serving and retired soldiers, appeared in court,
   accused of plotting a coup to overthrow President Robert Mugabe. This
   week, under South African stewardship, a delegation from Zimbabwe's
   ruling party met both factions of the opposition Movement for
   Democratic Change (MDC) in Pretoria, South Africa's capital. In March
   leaders of the 14-country Southern African Development Community had
   asked Thabo Mbeki, South Africa's president, to facilitate such
   discussions to prepare for elections in Zimbabwe next year. Does this
   mean Mr Mugabe is on his last legs?

   Not yet. But Mr Mugabe may be rattled by discord within the armed
   forces, albeit apparently at quite a low level. The alleged plotters
   say they were only trying to create a new political party. But
   discontent in the military rank and file, badly hurt by the economic
   meltdown, is rising.

   Though the top brass is a lot better off, the armed forces may at
   other levels be splitting along the same fault-line that runs through
   Mr Mugabe's ruling Zanu-PF party. Some Zimbabweans say that Emmerson
   Mnangagwa, a former speaker of Parliament and long-time security
   minister, and Solomon Mujuru, the vice-president's husband and a
   former army head, may be linked to the alleged plot, though this may
   just be speculation. Mr Mnangagwa strongly denies involvement.

   The opposition has laid out a road map towards the elections due next
   year. It wants to scrap laws curtailing freedom of the press and of
   assembly. It also wants new electoral rules, reform of the
   constitution and an end to state-sponsored violence and intimidation.
   And it wants the 3m or so Zimbabweans who have left the country to be
   allowed to vote. For its part, the ruling Zanu-PF wants sanctions
   lifted and Britain to help with land reform. This week the two sides
   apparently agreed to an agenda for discussion.

   Yet, at the same time, Mr Mugabe's government is pushing controversial
   laws through parliament. One allows for phone calls and e-mails to be
   monitored. Next month the ruling party is expected to table
   constitutional amendments that would tighten its grip on power. For
   instance, Parliament, rather than the Zimbabwean people in a direct
   vote, would pick a new president, were the incumbent to step down
   between elections. Another proposed change would boost parliamentary
   representation in rural areas, where Zanu-PF has its base, and give
   fewer seats to the towns, where the MDC predominates.

   Meanwhile, inflation is hovering around 4,500%, and eight Zimbabweans
   in ten do not have formal jobs. Some aid agencies say the government
   may fall within six months or so, as the economy collapses, but they
   have been saying so for some time. Though the formal economy is in
   dire straits, Zimbabweans have learnt to cope in other ways, mainly by
   relying on the black market and getting help from friends and family
   abroad. The UN's World Food Programme says that by next year 4.1m
   Zimbabweans may need food handouts, otherwise they may starve.

   "African economies, like old soldiers, do not die," says Arthur
   Mutambara, the leader of a breakaway faction of the MDC whose passport
   has just been confiscated. At least the grimness of the economy gives
   Zimbabwe's neighbours some levers: they can dangle promises of
   economic help to nudge negotiations along. But a small elite connected
   to Mr Mugabe and Zanu-PF has vested interests in the current system,
   where price controls and an artificial exchange rate offer juicy
   possibilities for making fortunes. It is not at all clear that they
   would risk a settlement that might see them booted out of power.

