
   The economy is shaking as government and opposition remain deadlocked

                                                                  Reuters
                                                                  Reuters


   NEARLY three weeks after a bitterly disputed election, President Mwai
   Kibaki (left), who almost certainly lost it, is defiantly refusing to
   compromise, let alone bow out, in the hope that time is on his side
   and that the fury of the thwarted opposition, led by Raila Odinga and
   his Orange Democratic Movement, will gradually subside. International
   mediators and Western diplomats have made no headway. The violence,
   which has caused some 600 deaths, has lessened a bit but has certainly
   not ended.

   Mr Odinga's Oranges won at least one notable victory this week after
   Parliament reopened. Despite a determined and expensive effort by the
   president's men to win over representatives from smaller parties, the
   Oranges got their choice as speaker, the third office in the land,
   when Kenneth Marende, a lawyer, squeaked in by 105 votes to 101. "I
   need all the prayers I can get," he said afterwards.

   Indeed he does. At times the proceedings were absurd. "Let us not make
   this political," implored the presiding clerk, while the two front
   benches exchanged taunts of "thief" and "murderer". Mr Kibaki was
   ignored by the opposition when he limped in; the Oranges rose in
   applause at Mr Odinga's entry. Mr Marende's election as speaker may
   have saved lives. Nationwide Orange protests were disruptive but less
   lethal than they might have been.

   So far, Western governments have yet to recognise Mr Kibaki fully. The
   biggest aid-givers, including the United States, Britain and the
   European Union, are threatening to divert their largesse from
   government coffers unless he seeks a "meaningful settlement" with the
   opposition. It is unclear whether that means the West wants Mr Kibaki
   to step down.

   The Americans were at first readier to endorse his re-election,
   because he has been their sturdy ally in their war on terror, whereas
   Mr Odinga, who won most of Kenya's Muslim votes, is warier of an
   American alliance. Now, however, the Americans seem to have come round
   to the European and British view that Mr Kibaki should, at the very
   least, offer Mr Odinga and his party a big role in government or
   perhaps even agree to run the election again, though that seems highly
   unlikely.

   Other African governments seem loth to interfere. John Kufuor, the
   Ghanaian president who also chairs the African Union, tried to mediate
   but entirely failed to shift Mr Kibaki, whose inner circle is plainly
   dismissive of international arbitration. "We won the election and do
   not see any point in anyone coming to mediate power-sharing," says
   John Michuki, a former security minister now in charge of roads.
   Another would-be mediator, the UN's former secretary-general, Kofi
   Annan, this week conveniently came down with flu and delayed his trip
   to Kenya.

   But Mr Kibaki is not yet home and dry. His loss of the speakership
   shows how hard it will be for him to govern through Parliament. He may
   try to ignore it and run the country from State House. With loyalists
   running the finance, justice and energy ministries, plus the security
   services, he may be able to do so. But it may make him even more
   unpopular outside his Kikuyu heartland and increase the lawlessness.

   Meanwhile, the economy is fast beginning to suffer. Business in
   down-town Nairobi, the capital, and in provincial towns across the
   country, has slumped. Tea-brokers in Mombasa, Kenya's second city,
   whose port serves most of east Africa, say that another month of
   instability could ruin the city's regular auction of one the country's
   main exports.

   Asian Kenyans are especially jittery. Many in the western city of
   Kisumu, Mr Odinga's provincial capital, have fled to Uganda. Some in
   Mombasa say they want to leave Kenya for good. An exodus of Asians
   would badly hurt Kenya's economy. So would the loss of shipping
   business to Dar es Salaam in neighbouring Tanzania, where a number of
   container ships have already been diverted.

   Pictures of angry men with machetes have scared off holidaymakers from
   the coast. Some hotels have closed for the season, others are nearly
   empty. Dhows and camel rides have no takers. South of Mombasa, many
   businesses belonging to Mr Kibaki's fellow Kikuyus have been burnt.

   If Mr Kibaki wants to rescue Kenya's faltering economy, let alone mend
   its politics, he must seek a compromise with his angry opponents. It
   is not yet clear whether time is on his side--or on Mr Odinga's.

