
   Robert Mugabe may be facing his most dangerous opponent yet

   THE new year has brought little joy to most Zimbabweans, as they
   struggle to survive worsening food shortages, hyperinflation and
   joblessness. But at least there is a flicker of movement on the
   political front. The ruling ZANU-PF is said to be on the brink of
   splitting, ahead of parliamentary and presidential elections due in
   March. Simba Makoni, a former finance minister, has been named as a
   prospective splinter's possible leader. Could he pose a serious
   challenge to President Robert Mugabe's hitherto firm grip on power?

   Mr Makoni, who has been in and out of cabinet since 1980, is still
   part of the ruling party's top leadership. Widely respected as a
   technocrat and one of ZANU-PF's few stalwarts untainted by corruption,
   he is a danger to Mr Mugabe because he could appeal both to
   disgruntled people in the ruling party as well as to the opposition.
   He does not have much grassroots support, but, in the words of Sydney
   Masamvu of the International Crisis Group, a Brussels-based lobby, he
   heads "a coalition of the wounded, the marginalised and the bitter"
   within ZANU-PF. Some within this coalition have links to Solomon
   Mujuru, a powerful party figure and former army chief whose wife is a
   vice-president. But it is unclear whether Mr Mujuru, who has hedged
   his bets in the past, is directly involved in Mr Makoni's brave--or
   rash--bid.

   Mr Mugabe would struggle to see off a big revolt within his ZANU-PF,
   especially if it were in cahoots with the opposition Movement for
   Democratic Change (MDC). But such an alliance would be hard to forge.
   Mr Mugabe has destroyed or co-opted his rivals for decades. The
   success of this latest rebellion would depend on whether the economic
   catastrophe and Mr Mugabe's excesses make enough ZANU-PF people stand
   up to the president and then stick together. If so, it may convince
   the MDC, which is itself split into two factions and is weak on its
   own, to close ranks and jump on a bandwagon led by Mr Makoni.

   In the meantime, talks between ZANU-PF and the two-headed MDC resumed
   this week. Following the beating-up of MDC leaders last March, South
   Africa's president, Thabo Mbeki, has been trying to mediate between
   the two sides. As a goodwill gesture, the MDC agreed to a
   constitutional amendment proposed by the ruling party that upped the
   number of seats in parliament, though the new constituencies are
   likely to favour ZANU-PF, which keeps a firm grip on rural areas. In
   December, repressive security and media laws were eased a bit. In a
   breakthrough, both sides agreed in principle to a new constitution.

   But the talks have not improved things on the ground. Amnesty
   International, a human-rights group, says the government still beats
   and tortures its opponents. Local watchdogs have decried
   irregularities in voter registration ahead of the election and in
   demarking constituencies.

   The MDC also wants the new constitution, which includes a requirement
   for an independent electoral commission, enacted before the election.
   This would mean preparing for it all over again, which Mr Mugabe
   unsurprisingly refuses to do. So the opposition wants the election
   postponed, and Morgan Tsvangirai, one of the MDC's rival leaders, has
   threatened to boycott it if these conditions are not met.

   Mr Mugabe, in power since 1980, is bent on winning another term. The
   South Africans hope that, fairly soon after that, he will step down
   and hand over to an anointed successor from within ZANU-PF, perhaps
   Emerson Mnangagwa, a former security chief who has been the Mujurus'
   rival in the ruling party. The new ruler might--so the plan
   goes--reach out to one faction of the MDC and form a national unity
   government. The West might then pile in with cash and advice to give
   Zimbabwe a fresh start.

   But Mr Makoni's bid, if he makes it, would turn all such calculations
   upside down. It is unclear how Mr Mugabe would handle or squash
   him--or whether Mr Makoni would take a big chunk of ZANU-PF with him
   or form a wider coalition from outside the ruling party. The MDC
   faction led by Arthur Mutambara is said to be keen to join up with
   him.

   Mr Mugabe, for his part, is said to be terrified that a new regime
   would send him to face charges of crimes against humanity at the
   international court in The Hague. In any event, Mr Makoni has given
   Zimbabweans at least a fleeting moment of hope that real change is in
   the offing at last.

