
   Corruption is already at the heart of Nigeria's election campaign 

                                                                  Reuters

                                  Reuters


   THE elections in Nigeria due in April are Africa's most important in a
   crowded electoral year. Much depends on their outcome: the country's
   nascent anti-corruption plan, the stability of the continent's most
   populous country, even a possible resolution of an insurgency in the
   Niger Delta region that threatens one of the West's most important
   sources of oil. So it made quite a stir last week when the
   government's anti-corruption watchdog launched a pre-emptive strike on
   the electoral process that could affect the course of the
   campaign--and even the result itself.

   The Economic and Financial Crimes Commission (EFCC) has sent letters
   to all the political parties listing 130 of their candidates who the
   commission said would soon be charged with corruption. Those named
   included several gubernatorial and parliamentary candidates. Most
   strikingly, the list includes Atiku Abubakar, the vice-president
   (pictured above), one of the two leading opposition candidates running
   against the ruling party's nominee for the presidency. Though the
   EFCC's deputy head, Ibrahim Lamorde, stressed that it was not for him
   to tell the parties how they should act on this knowledge, the
   independent electoral commission has already advised that those
   candidates accused of corruption, including Mr Abubakar, should not be
   able to stand.

   The EFCC's intervention is unprecedented, but Mr Lamorde argues that
   the law gives it "a lot of latitude" to act in any way that it deems
   necessary to fulfil its mandate of stamping out corruption in Nigeria.
   But its action has also raised more suspicions that much of its work
   is in fact partisan, in favour of President Olusegun Obasanjo and his
   ruling People's Democratic Party (PDP). Mr Obasanjo, who tried and
   failed to change the constitution last year to stay in power for a
   third successive term, wants his successor to be Umaru Yar'Adua, a
   reclusive governor who won the nomination for the PDP in December and
   who is the younger brother of Mr Obasanjo's deputy during the
   president's time as a military ruler in the 1970s. In contrast, Mr
   Obasanjo seems to have been doing everything in his power to try and
   knock Mr Abubakar out of the race, using the EFCC as his main weapon.

   Last year the commission issued a lengthy report on Mr Abubakar's
   alleged misuse of $125m from a petroleum trust fund. He denies all the
   charges. A former customs boss, Mr Abubakar takes credit for swaying
   influential figures across the country to back Mr Obasanjo in the 2003
   elections but has subsequently fallen out badly with him. Mr Obasanjo
   tried to strip Mr Abubakar of the vice-presidency last year after he
   left the PDP for another party, the Action Congress, an opposition
   alliance which has absorbed a clutch of other PDP defectors fed up
   with Mr Obasanjo's authoritarian ways.

   Claiming the moral high ground after the commission's blacklist came
   out, the PDP immediately said that it would replace all 52 of its
   candidates on the list, whereas Mr Abubakar dismissed it as "a piece
   of cheap blackmail". Unfortunately, many will agree with him. Many
   politicians feel that Mr Obasanjo's apparently selective use of the
   commission to wage his party's electoral battles undermines the work
   of the Nuhu Ribadu, the commission's boss, who has done a lot to go
   after many of the country's indubitably corrupt politicians, including
   31 of Nigeria's 36 sitting governors. Even some in the ruling party
   wonder why Mr Obasanjo will not allow Mr Abubakar and his relatively
   weak party to campaign. "It just shows that Obasanjo has a morbid fear
   of Atiku Abubakar," says one senior PDP official.

   That fear could be justified. If Mr Abubakar, who still enjoys a
   strong following even in the PDP, were to win the presidential poll,
   it would be hard to imagine that Mr Obasanjo, stripped of his
   constitutional immunity, would be left unmolested. The ruling party
   may have to rig elections more seriously than it did the last time
   round to get Mr Yar'Adua elected. Muhammadu Buhari, a stern former
   military ruler who ran for president in 2003, is another opposition
   front-runner in this year's poll. He said this week that the PDP was
   already making headway in its race to rig the elections.

