
                                                                  Reuters

                                  Reuters

   America agonises over the pitfalls of staying in Iraq--and of leaving


   "AMERICA is between two fires. If it stays in Iraq, it will bleed to
   death; if it leaves, it will lose everything." So said Ayman
   al-Zawahiri, Osama bin Laden's deputy, in 2004. If he is right, can
   America extract itself from this trap?

   When America's senior commander in Iraq, General David Petraeus, and
   its ambassador in Baghdad, Ryan Crocker, brief Congress on the state
   of the war from September 10th onwards, they will find a capital
   divided. Much of Congress has decided that the war is lost and the
   troops should be brought home. Others believe that General Petraeus's
   "surge" is starting to work and that the politicians are in danger of
   losing a war the army is beginning to win.

   More than four years on, "winning" can of course no longer mean what
   the architects of the 2003 invasion hoped for. President George Bush
   aimed not only to rid Iraq of its weapons of mass destruction (WMD)
   but also to liberate it from dictatorship and create a pro-Western
   democracy in the heart of the Arab world.

   These high hopes have burned to ash. Saddam is dead and Iraqis voted
   freely in 2005 for their present government. But there were no WMD,
   the government is in chaos and the country is ravaged by violence.
   Under occupation Iraq has become both a recruiting-sergeant and a
   training ground for al-Qaeda. The civilian death toll is contested,
   but almost certainly exceeds 100,000. More than 3,700 American
   soldiers (and nearly 300 other coalition soldiers) have died. The
   serious debate is therefore not between victory or defeat but over how
   to mitigate the consequences of a disaster that has already taken
   place.

   The violence in Iraq is not distributed evenly. In the north the Kurds
   have carved out an autonomous and largely peaceful enclave (see
   [4]article) although there is potentially explosive conflict over the
   status of Kirkuk. In the four south-eastern provinces most violence
   has been either directed at the small British garrison in the port
   city of Basra, or is part of a turf fight between Shia militias such
   as the Badr brigade and the Mahdi army, both affiliated to Shia
   political blocks in parliament.

   General Petraeus's surge of recent months has not aimed at these
   areas, but has concentrated on Baghdad and the intensely violent
   centre of the country. There, at least three overlapping wars are
   raging. One consists of attacks by the jihadists of al-Qaeda against
   the Americans, government forces and Shia civilians. Another is a
   sectarian war between Sunnis and Shias. Last, many Sunnis and Shias
   alike attack the Americans simply because they are seen as unwanted
   foreign occupiers. A poll in September 2006 found that 92% of Sunnis
   and 62% of Shias approved of such attacks.

   The surge is not only a reinforcement but also, more important, a
   change of tactics. General Petraeus has deployed some 30,000 extra
   troops, bringing the grand total to about 160,000. More significant
   has been the new plan. Under General George Casey, General Petraeus's
   predecessor, the aim was to put Iraq's army in charge of security. Now
   the Americans have taken charge of protecting Iraq's civilians
   themselves. Instead of moving on after pacifying a neighbourhood, only
   for insurgents to return in their wake, they stay put.

   Is the surge working? The answer is in the eye of the beholder. In an
   interview in the Australian on August 31st, General Petraeus said the
   new approach had made his soldiers "pursuers instead of defenders",
   putting al-Qaeda "off-balance at the very least". He said the number
   of sectarian killings in Baghdad had fallen by August to a quarter of
   its December level, and the number of weapons-cache finds had doubled.
   He called al-Qaeda "enemy number one", because its mass murders had
   ignited sectarian violence. But Iran's "malign involvement" in arming
   and directing Shia militias was also a problem.

   In a separate assessment of progress, the authors of America's
   National Intelligence Estimate (NIE) said in August that there had
   been "measurable but uneven" improvements in security. The report,
   approved by 16 intelligence agencies, concluded that a previously
   steep escalation in violence had been checked. If robust
   counter-insurgency operations continued, said the NIE, security would
   improve modestly in the next six to 12 months, but overall violence
   would remain high.

   Two influential Washington think-tankers who visited Iraq in
   July--Michael O'Hanlon and Kenneth Pollack of the Brookings
   Institution--returned somewhat upbeat. They concluded that the surge
   had improved security and economic conditions in areas where General
   Petraeus had concentrated his forces. The Americans were working
   alongside Iraqi units that seemed more competent and less sectarian
   than before. But a commission headed by James Jones, a retired marine
   general, told Congress this week that the army's effectiveness was
   "limited", the interior ministry "dysfunctional" and the police
   riddled with sectarianism.

   A stroke of luck in Anbar

   Even the reports of modest progress need to be read with the utmost
   caution. That is because the single best bit of news is a stroke of
   luck that probably had little to do with General Petraeus's surge and
   may not last. In some Sunni-dominated provinces, especially Anbar,
   local tribal leaders who previously supported al-Qaeda have been
   repelled by the high-handed brutality of the foreign jihadists and are
   now working with the Americans. Last year, al-Qaeda controlled wide
   areas of Anbar and American officers deemed the province lost. Now it
   is one of the safer parts of Iraq.

   On September 3rd Mr Bush paid a surprise visit to an American base in
   Anbar, citing the province as proof that "success is possible".
   Besides posing for photos, he met Iraq's prime minister, Nuri
   al-Maliki, and local sheikhs. "The people of this province are seeing
   that standing up to the extremists is the path to a better life," said
   Mr Bush. To the people of Anbar and Iraq, he promised that "America
   does not abandon our friends." Addressing the audience back home, he
   said that "if the kind of success we are now seeing continues, it will
   be possible to maintain the same level of security with fewer American
   forces."

   The turnaround in Anbar is real. The question is how durable it is.
   Anthony Cordesman, of the Centre for Strategic and International
   Studies, returned from a visit in July convinced that the Sunnis who
   had been fighting American forces were now willing to work alongside
   the Shia-dominated government if offered money, status and a share of
   power. The authors of the NIE are less optimistic. They say Sunni
   resistance to al-Qaeda has not yet turned into support for the
   government or a willingness to work with the Shias.

                                                                      AFP
                                                                      AFP

                                                 Her window on the future

   Nor, understandably, does the government yet trust these potential new
   allies. In August seven American soldiers approaching the end of their
   tour in Iraq published an op-ed article in the New York Times that
   cast doubt on claims of progress. It was true that armed Sunni tribes
   had become American allies. "But the enduring question is where their
   loyalties would lie in our absence. The Iraqi government finds itself
   working at cross-purposes with us on this issue because it is
   justifiably fearful that Sunni militias will turn on it should the
   Americans leave."

   Another reason for caution is that even if the Sunni change of heart
   keeps al-Qaeda off balance, jihadist attacks make up only one of those
   three Iraqi wars. The surge has yet to dampen down the civil war
   between Sunnis and Shias. Despite the drop General Petraeus points to
   in Baghdad's death toll, Sunnis are still being hounded out of mixed
   neighbourhoods--often by the national police and the interior
   ministry, which are riddled with Shia militias. The third war
   continues, too. Even as America tries to reduce sectarian violence,
   its soldiers still come under attack by Sunnis and Shias alike.

   At the start of his new mission, General Petraeus made it clear that
   military means alone could not deliver success. Politics would have to
   play its part. But Iraq's sectarian parties have not agreed to share
   power and wealth in a way that might draw the conflict's poison.
   America's Congress has set out a series of "benchmarks" for Iraq's
   government, such as ensuring that the oil-poor Sunni provinces get a
   fair share of revenues and letting former Baathists back into
   government jobs. But Congress's Government Accountability Office
   reported this week that, of 18 benchmarks, Iraq had met only three in
   full and four in part. The NIE's assessment is that over the next six
   to 12 months Mr Maliki's government will become even more precarious
   as sectarian splits deepen.

   In Anbar Mr Bush raised the prospect of withdrawing some troops, but
   only "based on a calm assessment by our military commanders on the
   conditions on the ground--not a nervous reaction by Washington
   politicians." The calm General Petraeus later confirmed in a TV
   interview that some scaling back of the surge was probable. This,
   however, was always expected. America's ground forces are under
   unprecedented strain, and the longer the extra troops stay the more
   the generals worry that the all-volunteer army will "break". Frontline
   units are already serving their third or fourth battle tours, and
   their deployments have been extended to 15 months with only a year at
   home to recuperate (British forces serve six-month tours, with two
   years at home). Continuing the surge beyond next spring would mean
   either extending tours beyond 15 months, or calling up more soldiers
   from the National Guard and reserves, or both.

   The election at home

   American politicians are hardly less divided than Iraq's. With only 14
   months until the next election, polls matter. Mr Bush will never have
   to face the voters again, but the other players in Washington--members
   of Congress and candidates for the presidency--think of little else.

   Most Democrats in Congress want to pull America out of Iraq as soon as
   is practical. Harry Reid, the Senate majority leader, spoke for many
   earlier this year when he said the war was lost. In theory, Congress
   can force a pull-out by denying Mr Bush the funds to continue
   fighting. But that is harder than it sounds. For obvious political
   reasons, the Democrats cannot simply cut off the funds that keep
   American soldiers properly supplied and equipped in the field. They
   can try to pass war-funding bills with strings attached--such as a
   demand for withdrawal by a certain date. But they need 60 votes (out
   of 100) in the Senate to get past a Republican filibuster, and they do
   not have them.

   To woo wavering Republicans, some Democrats are elasticating their
   deadlines. Carl Levin, the chairman of the Senate Armed Services
   Committee, who sponsors a bill calling for a withdrawal to begin
   within 120 days, leaving a limited presence by April 30th 2008, says
   he might drop the end-date if that allows the bill to pass. Anti-war
   activists seethe at such compromises, but Democratic leaders in
   Congress retort that they have to be pragmatic.

   For Democrats vying for the party's presidential nomination, the
   calculation is different. To win the nomination, a candidate must
   appeal to the kind of hard-core Democrats who vote in primaries, who
   tend to be furiously anti-war. Some pander without reservation. Bill
   Richardson demands that Congress "de-authorise" the war. John Edwards
   dismissed Mr Bush's trip to Anbar this week as a "photo op" and
   downplayed any progress there by noting that Anbar is "a homogeneous
   area that lacks the ethnic conflict that's plaguing the rest of the
   country." He demanded that Congress confront the president over Iraq:
   "No timeline, no funding. No excuses."

   Others are more circumspect. Hillary Clinton, the favourite to win the
   Democratic nomination, said last month that the new tactics seemed to
   be working in some provinces, such as Anbar. She favours "beginning"
   to bring the troops home, but is careful not to make detailed promises
   that might tie her hands. This may be because she expects to win, and
   to have to oversee America's endgame in Iraq.

   Republican presidential candidates tend to support Mr Bush and the
   surge, but among the big-hitters only John McCain says much about it
   on the campaign trail. Mr McCain called for extra troops long before
   they were sent, so Mr Bush's conversion to his point of view counts as
   a triumph of sorts for the senator from Arizona. But his loud
   association with an unpopular war makes him all but unelectable. His
   main rivals, Rudy Giuliani, Mitt Romney and Fred Thompson, emphasise
   how tough they will be on terrorists but say as little as possible
   about Iraq.

   Run and hope for the best?

   What if America cut its losses and left altogether now? ("Now"
   actually means over the many months, or perhaps a year, it would take
   to remove all its forces, contractors and their paraphernalia.) A few
   advocates of early withdrawal claim that by announcing its departure
   America would galvanise Iraqi politicians into making the painful but
   necessary power-sharing compromises they have so far been able to
   avoid. Barry Posen, director of security studies at the Massachusetts
   Institute of Technology, was arguing more than a year ago that the
   occupation was "infantilising" Iraq's politics. But most advocates of
   leaving acknowledge that conditions in Iraq would probably get worse.

   In December 2006 the Iraq Study Group chaired by James Baker and Lee
   Hamilton suggested that most of America's soldiers could leave by the
   first quarter of 2008, even though a "precipitate" withdrawal could
   lead to more violence, a power vacuum, regional instability and the
   intervention of neighbours. Many independent analysts have since come
   to agree. In February Steven Simon, a former member of America's
   National Security Council, produced a report for the Council on
   Foreign Relations, arguing that since America would not be able to
   stop Iraq's civil wars by staying on, it should announce a plan for a
   "military disengagement" over a period of 12 to 18 months.

   Mr Simon does not expect the violence to become less intense once
   America begins to leave, but thinks a Sunni-Shia military stalemate
   would be a likelier outcome than the wholesale expulsion or genocide
   of the Sunnis. That, he says, is because the Shias show little
   interest in conquering the Sunni areas, and because neither side has
   the aircraft, heavy artillery or armour to reduce cities to rubble and
   so inflict truly massive casualties. But most truly awful recent wars
   (Congo, Rwanda) were fought mainly with small arms. Toby Dodge, a
   well-respected Iraq-watcher at London's International Institute for
   Strategic Studies, has argued that the growing conventional
   wisdom--"run away and hope for the best"--would lead to a lethal
   free-for-all and a collapse into warlordism.

   Needless to say, proponents of early withdrawal do not characterise
   their approach as just hoping for the best. They think that by taking
   care over the timing and manner of its departure America may still be
   able to shape events and diminish the chances of leaving mayhem
   behind. In Mr Simon's plan, for example, America would continue to
   give Iraq aid and training and keep troops nearby so they could
   intervene if a genocide really did unfold. The Centre for American
   Progress proposes a "phased consolidation": American troops would
   withdraw from the most stable bits of Iraq first, to avoid leaving "a
   sudden and immediate power vacuum".

   Such plans may include too much wishful thinking. In June Senator
   Richard Lugar, a senior Republican who believes the war has failed,
   said America ought to leave in a way that prevented Iraq becoming a
   haven for terrorists, safeguarded regional stability, prevented
   Iranian domination of the area and limited the damage to America's
   reputation. That is a lot to ask from a withdrawing army. In Basra,
   the British forces who withdrew this week from the palace to the
   airport found themselves incapable of shaping events in the city once
   their numbers dwindled below the level at which they could impose
   their will on the streets (see [5]article).

   If the main affliction of Iraq is a sectarian civil war, might
   partition be the solution? In his June speech Mr Lugar said that "few
   Iraqis have demonstrated that they want to be Iraqis". With the
   half-exception of the Kurds, however, Iraq does not lend itself to
   neat division. More than half of its population lives in four mixed
   cities, Baghdad, Basra, Mosul and Kirkuk. It is true that if ethnic
   cleansing continues for long enough (a large proportion of its
   minority populations has already been displaced), Iraq may end up
   breaking into Sunni, Shia and Kurdish mini-states. But to produce such
   an outcome by consent would require Iraq's mistrustful politicians to
   make heroic decisions on where to draw borders and how to share the
   oil.

   Mr Lugar's assessment of what Iraqis want may anyway be wrong. A
   series of opinion surveys conducted by Mansoor Moaddel, who is
   affiliated with Eastern Michigan University and the University of
   Michigan Institute for Social Research, has found that Iraqi Arabs, if
   not the Kurds, have a strong sense of national identity. Though
   sectarian conflict is increasing, he says, "It would be a mistake to
   think that this bloodlust represents widespread sentiment among Iraqis
   as a whole. While neither American nor Iraqi security officials have
   yet found a way to tame the militias, the Iraqi public is increasingly
   drawn toward a vision of a democratic, non-sectarian government for
   the country."

   Strategic ju-jitsu

   Almost all advocates of early withdrawal stress the desirability of
   co-operation with Iraq's neighbours. The Baker-Hamilton report said
   that America needed to reach out to Iran and Syria, America's
   adversaries. Since May American diplomats have twice met their Iranian
   counterparts to discuss security in Iraq, but these meetings have so
   far achieved little. The Americans say that Iran is helping its Shia
   allies in Iraq to attack American soldiers. The Iranians deny this but
   make no secret of wanting to humble the superpower in Iraq, if only to
   deter it from attacking them too.

   It has become a commonplace to point out that America's invasion of
   Iraq has strengthened Iran. With Saddam dead and a friendly Shia
   government in Baghdad, the mullahs in Tehran are showing a new
   self-confidence. Ayatollah Ali Khamenei, Iran's supreme leader, says
   that America is "stuck in a whirlpool" and sinking deeper. Iran's
   president, Mahmoud Ahmadinejad, adds that Iran is ready to fill the
   vacuum.

   Even after leaving Iraq America would have strategic interests in the
   energy-rich Middle East. To reassure allies, Mr Bush has beefed up
   American naval forces in the Persian Gulf and promised to provide
   nervous Sunni Arab regimes (and Israel) with dollops of advanced
   weaponry over the coming decade. On top of this the Americans are
   trying to block Iran's fishy-looking nuclear programme by imposing
   economic sanctions, both directly and through the UN Security Council.

                                                                       AP

                                     AP

                    It's been nice knowing you--sort of

   There is another school of thought. Some analysts see Iran as a
   country that is as keen as America to avoid chaos in Iraq and so can
   be enlisted as a helper. William Lind of the Free Congress Foundation
   argues that America should get out and let a pro-Iranian strongman
   such as Muqtada al-Sadr re-establish strong central authority. Such an
   Iraq would not be a pro-American state but it would at least be a
   state. Others advocate an American rapprochement with Iran similar to
   the opening Richard Nixon and Henry Kissinger made to China as cover
   for leaving Vietnam.

   In any such attempt at strategic ju-jitsu, however, America's
   bargaining position will in the end depend on a combination of
   military strength and political will. Mr Bush's message from Anbar
   this week seemed to be that America could escape from its Iraqi trap
   only by making itself look strong again before getting out. General
   Petraeus has to persuade Congress that such a plan is still possible.

