
   Fears grow of an alliance between al-Qaeda and home-grown terrorists 


   IN THE rugged hills of the interior, Algeria's security services have
   been busy bombarding, encircling, flushing out and killing rebels who
   are reputed to have joined the nebulous ranks of al-Qaeda. An
   enthusiastic press reports every twist and turn of the great
   offensive. In the past three weeks alone, the alleged mastermind of a
   pair of recent suicide-bombings is said to have been slain, an
   important emir from the south has turned himself in and dozens of
   people--mostly rebels, but also a few soldiers--have been reported
   killed in army crackdowns across the north of the country.

   This is the government's latest response to a noticeable increase in
   terrorist attacks following the forging of an alliance last September
   between the Salafist Group for Preaching and Combat, the remnants of
   Algeria's Islamist insurgency in the 1990s, and al-Qaeda. Four months
   later the Salafist group, better known by its French acronym GSPC,
   changed its name to the al-Qaeda Organisation in the Islamic Maghreb.
   After some co-ordinated attacks on police stations and a couple of
   roadside bombs targeting foreign workers, on April 11th the group
   claimed a triple suicide-bombing in the capital that hit not only a
   police station but also the building that houses the offices of both
   the prime minister and the interior minister. Foreign fighters have
   also been picked up near the Tunisian border. In July a
   suicide-bombing struck an army barracks 40 miles (64km) south-east of
   Algiers, followed a few days later by a prolonged and spectacular
   night-time shoot-out at a military police station in Kabylia.

   April's attacks in the capital prompted a shift in government tactics.
   For several years, ministers had talked up a peace and reconciliation
   plan, brushing off terrorism as nothing more than a "residual"
   problem. But in an independence day speech last month, President
   Abdelaziz Bouteflika called for the fight against terrorism to be
   pursued "without reprieve", heralding the new, more intensive military
   campaign. The police chief, Ali Tounsi, whose house was targeted in
   April by a car bomb that failed to detonate, has likened the progress
   of the security forces to a "steamroller". The local press, often cosy
   with the security services, talks frequently of the imminent defeat of
   the former GSPC, and even of al-Qaeda's failure to implant itself in
   north Africa generally.

   This may be too optimistic. Algeria's insurgency is a shadow of what
   it was just a few years ago but it has, nonetheless, been given fresh
   heart by the al-Qaeda alliance. Some of the country's many unemployed
   and disenchanted youths may have been lured into jihadism by slick
   propaganda and a global cause.

   Despite this, the pattern of the violence so far suggests that
   Algeria's terrorism is still mostly a local affair, rooted in the
   bloody civil conflict of the 1990s. Its principal targets remain the
   army and police and its principal financing comes from local crime,
   including kidnapping. Little evidence has emerged of operational links
   between the Maghreb's terrorists and al-Qaeda's global network. Still,
   the Maghreb is close to Europe. And that makes any scent of al-Qaeda a
   distinct worry for the wider world.

