
   Few Arabs are in the mood to give Mr Bush the benefit of their doubt



   DURING half a century of American engagement with the Arab world,
   American presidents have tended to get nicer to the Arabs towards the
   end of their term, when they have less to lose at home by doing so.
   With his Middle East tour, George Bush has stuck to that rule. The
   difference is that, with America's failure to sort out Iraq or make
   peace between Israelis and Palestinians or to persuade Muslims that
   the war on terror is not unfairly directed at themselves, no other
   president has had to control quite so much damage.

   A speech in Abu Dhabi, capital of the United Arab Emirates, was touted
   as the keynote of his seven-country tour. In it, he touched on
   familiar themes, such as the wickedness of Iran's rulers and his
   belief that only democracy can free people from oppression and
   insecurity. "You cannot stand up a modern and confident nation when
   you do not allow people to voice their legitimate criticisms," he
   said.

   While officials from the host country quietly distanced themselves
   from America's Iran policy, Arab commentators questioned whether the
   head of an administration responsible for the miseries of Abu Ghraib
   and Guantánamo could preach human rights or whether Mr Bush's lavish
   praise for some Gulf monarchs' gestures towards democracy, such as
   holding highly restricted elections, meant that he cared more about
   securing cheap oil than promoting real political reform.

   The state of American-Arab relations seemed more sharply depicted in
   Saudi Arabia, when Mr Bush joined in a traditional dance with Prince
   Salman bin Abdul Aziz, the powerful governor of Riyadh, the Saudi
   capital, and a possible future king. Meant to display tribal
   solidarity as he danced, a sword-clutching Mr Bush looked awkward as
   he shuffled clumsily, arm in arm with his robed companion.

   It was, in fact, America that was supplying the real weapons, with an
   announcement, coinciding with the presidential tour, that it would
   sell Saudi Arabia 900 guided-bomb kits worth $123m as part of a
   longer-term pledge to transfer some $20 billion in arms to its Arab
   Gulf allies. Yet the sale's hoped-for favourable impact dissipated
   when an Israeli military source asserted that Israel, which is getting
   10,000 American precision-guided bombs free, would get a smarter
   version. This comment was meant to reassure America's pro-Israeli
   Congress about the Saudi sale, but certainly managed to annoy the
   Saudis. "The region needs smart initiatives, not smart bombs," growled
   an editorial in Kuwait's daily al-Rai al-Am.

   Despite the wave of sourness in the Middle East towards Mr Bush's
   visit, signs were noted that his administration, albeit late in its
   tenure, was paying more attention to Arab concerns. Assuaging fears
   that taking too hard a line with Iran could lead to a conflict that
   would hurt the whole region, Mr Bush tempered his tough language with
   the hope that if the "talented Iranian people" moderated their rulers'
   behaviour, Iran and America could become best of friends. Mr Bush also
   praised a new Iraqi law (see [3]article) to let some former members of
   Saddam Hussein's Baath party regain their jobs; some Arab commentators
   noted that it was Mr Bush's administration that had demanded their
   dismissal in the first place. The president's repeated determination
   to bring about a "viable, contiguous" Palestinian state also went some
   way to alter the impression that his administration has been loth to
   press Israel to make concessions.

   Though urging Arab oil producers to boost output to reduce the high
   price of oil, Mr Bush was careful to say that he knew many were
   already producing at full capacity. Such courtesy may reflect, among
   other things, America's appreciation that rich Gulf producers have
   declined so far to uncouple their currencies from the dollar, despite
   its falling value and advice from many local economists. Arab
   investors, including the sovereign funds of Kuwait and Abu Dhabi,
   sound willing to inject billions into wobbly American financial houses
   such as Citibank and Merrill Lynch.

   Uglier realities did intrude, however. In Beirut, an American embassy
   vehicle narrowly evaded a bomb-blast that killed three bystanders,
   further shaking the hold of Lebanon's pro-American government, which
   has been locked in a stalemate with its opponents led by Hizbullah,
   the Iranian-backed Shia militia. And an Israeli raid against
   rocket-firers in Gaza killed 18 Palestinians, the highest day's death
   toll for months. The dead included a son of a former foreign minister
   of Hamas, the Islamist group that seized the strip last summer. He
   blamed Mr Bush for giving Israel a "green light" for the killings.

