
   Even the parts of Somalia that were steady are looking shaky again


   A PECULIARITY of Somalia is that while the south of the country,
   including its broken capital, Mogadishu, has burned, the north has
   been stable. Now, to the horror of those trying to put Mogadishu back
   together again, the north is beginning to crack too. Fighting broke
   out this week between Somaliland, the northern strip that has been
   virtually independent of the rest of the country for some 16 years,
   and Puntland, a semi-autonomous territory in the north-east (see map).
   Somaliland says it has driven Puntland forces out of Los Anod, a town
   in the disputed Sool region, killing six Puntlanders and injuring or
   capturing another 40-plus. Puntland says its soldiers have retaken the
   town. Yet another war seems to be breaking out.

   Sool is split between sub-clans backing either Somaliland or Puntland,
   while some of them want autonomy for Sool itself. Somaliland, a former
   British colony that was separate from the larger parts that were run
   by Italy, declared independence in 1991 and has since sought
   international recognition. Puntland's sense of identity is less
   strong; it has seen itself as a building block for a future federal
   Somalia.

   But Puntland is losing its grip. The Sool dispute has been compounded
   by the secession of much of the Sanaag region from Puntland, to form
   yet another self-governing entity in the north. Drawing on its history
   as a sultanate, Sanaag declared independence in July, renamed itself
   Makhir, and chose Badhan as its capital. Tension between Makhir and
   Puntland is high.

   A still worse headache for Puntland is the departure of its strongman,
   Abdullahi Yusuf, to become president of Somalia. He ran Puntland with
   authority and ambition, grandiosely hoping to turn it into the Horn of
   Africa's Dubai. When he went south, he took with him a lot of Puntland
   troops, vehicles, weapons and ammunition. Their departure emboldened
   other northerners with dreams of secession or autonomy, and may give
   Somaliland the edge if the dispute over Sool leads to war.

   Oil and gas add fuel to the ferment. Exploration rights in Puntland
   have been sold several times over. Somalia's prickly prime minister,
   Ali Mohamed Gedi, was furious when Mr Yusuf signed oil agreements
   without telling him, including one with a Chinese company. Mr Gedi has
   also refused to endorse exploration deals signed by Puntland's
   government.

   Meanwhile, Mogadishu is getting worse again. Fewer children are going
   to school. The city's markets are stagnant--quite the opposite of the
   government's assertions that things are back to normal. Government
   troops and the Ethiopian forces propping up Somalia's government are
   still being attacked by bombs, grenades and snipers of the Islamist
   militias ousted by Ethiopians early this year. The African Union
   promised to send 8,000 peacekeepers and then hand authority to a UN
   mission later this year. But several AU countries failed to honour
   their pledges. Uganda is still the only African one to have sent
   troops; with just 1,600 of them there, the UN is unlikely to come in
   and take over.

   The American administration and other Western governments still want
   to back Somalia's transitional government until elections due in 2009.
   A recent reconciliation conference in Mogadishu passed off without
   rancour, itself something of a success, and was bolstered by the
   apparent failure of a rival meeting, mainly of Somali Islamists, in
   the Eritrean capital, Asmara.

