
   Getting into its stride


   ORGANISED mass rape, as a war crime. After the mutilation of civilians
   in northern Uganda, the conscription of child soldiers in Congo and
   potential genocide in Sudan, this is what the International Criminal
   Court (ICC) has chosen to focus on in its latest investigation,
   announced this week. This time the atrocities were carried out in the
   Central African Republic (CAR) in 2002-2003.

   Ever since winning independence from France in 1960, this impoverished
   and landlocked country of 4m-odd people has suffered repeated coups
   and civil strife. In 1993, Ange-Félix Patassé became the CAR's first
   president to win power in a reasonably fair election. He was
   re-elected, again quite fairly, in 1999. But in October 2002 his
   army's former head, General François Bozizé, launched a coup. It
   failed, and Mr Patassé cracked down harshly. In March 2003 General
   Bozizé took power in a second coup. He is still president.

   During those five months of conflict, Mr Patassé enlisted the support
   of rebel troops from the Congo, led by Jean-Pierre Bemba, and
   mercenaries from Chad and Libya to help defend his capital, Bangui.
   Human-rights groups have accused them of carrying out appalling
   atrocities.

   The sexual violence was particularly brutal. For the first time the
   court is investigating a situation where the number of rape victims
   exceeds the number of murders, says Luis Moreno-Ocampo, the ICC's
   chief prosecutor. He has had detailed accounts from at least 600 rape
   victims, including children, old women and men. Many were gang-raped,
   often in public.

   In December 2004, Mr Bozizé asked the ICC to investigate the
   atrocities allegedly committed by Mr Patassé's and Mr Bemba's men,
   explaining that the CAR's own courts had no jurisdiction over those
   outside the country. Mr Patassé is in exile in Togo, while Mr Bemba, a
   former vice-president of Congo, is in self-imposed exile in Portugal
   after losing last year's presidential run-off against Joseph Kabila.
   The CAR is one of 104 members of the ICC.

   Mr Moreno-Ocampo insists he is "not targeting any particular suspect
   at this stage". But Messrs Patassé and Bemba, who vigorously deny any
   wrong-doing, are plainly in his sights. He says the ICC is also
   monitoring the deteriorating humanitarian conditions along the CAR's
   northern border with Chad and Sudan.

   This is the fourth formal investigation launched by the court since it
   was set up in The Hague five years ago. Many, including some of its
   original backers, have complained about the slowness of its
   procedures. But it has passed some notable milestones. It has issued
   international arrest warrants against its first two suspects in Sudan
   and five rebel leaders in Uganda. Its first trial--of Thomas Lubanga,
   a Congolese rebel leader--is due later this year. Many a highly placed
   thug, it is hoped, is beginning to sleep less easily at night.

