
   Are South Africa's crime-busting Scorpions about to lose their sting?

                                                                  Reuters
                                                                  Reuters

                                    The people's hero, so leave him alone


   WHILE Jacob Zuma, South Africa's former deputy president who is
   accused of corruption, appeared in court this week, the fate of those
   who sent him there was also hanging in the balance. A commission
   headed by a judge, Sisi Khampepe, was hearing submissions to decide on
   the future of the Scorpions, the crime-fighting unit of the National
   Prosecuting Authority (NPA). Created in 1999 by President Thabo Mbeki
   to fight corruption and organised crime, the Scorpions may now be
   disbanded or folded into the regular police force, to the dismay of
   South Africans who want to make their country cleaner.

   The Scorpions have some impressive scalps. They helped convict Nelson
   Mandela's former wife, Winnie, of fraud; ditto the former chief whip
   of the ruling African National Congress (ANC), Tony Yengeni. And due
   to their investigations, Schabir Shaik, a businessman who advised Mr
   Zuma, was convicted in June of corruption and fraud, leading to Mr
   Zuma's sacking as deputy president. The Scorpions have a reputation as
   fearless knights chasing well-connected crooks.

   They also have their detractors. Mr Zuma's supporters say his
   prosecution is politically motivated. The police and the National
   Intelligence Agency accuse the unit of stepping on their toes and
   lacking supervision. During Mrs Khampepe's hearings, the justice
   minister, Brigitte Mabandla, who is responsible for the Scorpions,
   questioned the continued need for an entity outside the police force.
   She also said that the relations between the elite unit and other
   law-enforcement agencies had broken down "irretrievably", an
   allegation denied by Vusi Pikoli, the NPA's boss.

   For the liberal Democratic Alliance (DA), the main opposition in
   parliament, this is pure politics. It argues that the Scorpions, with
   their conviction rate of over 90%, are a success and should be left
   alone. The unit has its prosecutors, investigators and intelligence
   operatives working under one roof, and attracts high-calibre staff.
   That would rapidly cease if the Scorpions were folded into the police,
   says the DA. It also blames the government for turf wars within
   law-enforcement agencies and failures of accountability. The
   ministerial committee meant to keep an eye on such issues failed to
   convene until last year.

   The hearings are due to conclude this week. Once the commission's
   suggestions are on his desk, Mr Mbeki must decide on the Scorpions'
   fate. With Mr Zuma's trial not expected until next year, they may not
   survive to see the conclusion of their most prominent case.

