
                                                                    Panos

                                   Panos

   Food becomes scarcer, even in Robert Mugabe's rural strongholds

   THE meeting of the 14-member Southern African Development Community
   (SADC) in Zambia last week provided scant hope for the people of
   Zimbabwe. Few details emerged from behind the closed doors, but
   Zambia's President Levy Mwanawasa, who currently chairs the regional
   body and had previously compared Zimbabwe to a sinking Titanic,
   declared that problems in the neighbouring country were "exaggerated".
   With 80% unemployment, inflation that could now be over 10,000%, and
   severe shortages of the most basic goods, many Zimbabweans may
   disagree. Over 3m of them are thought to have left the country, and
   the UN refugee agency is working on contingency plans in case the
   exodus worsens.

   Another UN agency, the World Food Programme, reckons that 4m
   Zimbabweans--about one-third of the population--will need food aid by
   the beginning of next year. The harvest of maize, the local staple
   food, was meagre this year. Rains have been poor, and the government's
   disastrous land-reform programme has turned once flourishing
   commercial farming into subsistence agriculture.

   This is plain to see in rural Mashonaland, the area around the
   capital, Harare, and the traditional heartland of President Robert
   Mugabe's ruling ZANU-PF. Most of the land where tobacco and maize used
   to grow lies fallow, taken over by wild vegetation. A few hours' drive
   south of Harare, a commercial farm that used to grow maize and rear
   cattle has now been divided into 35 plots where subsistence farmers
   try to scrape a living. The irrigation system and the water pump that
   once turned the harsh terrain into fertile soil and provided drinking
   water broke down long ago. Only one of the 100 or so farm workers who
   used to work there remains. His small plot is dry, and he has to walk
   several kilometres to get water from a neighbouring farm. He reckons
   he has enough maize to feed his family until November. When his stock
   runs out, he'll be lucky to get one meal a day until the next harvest,
   in March or April.

   A school was set up on the farm, and one of the teachers now lives in
   the main house, which was looted when the white owner was evicted.
   Even light switches have been ripped from the walls, not that they
   would be of much use now. There is electricity a few hours a day only,
   usually at night. The taps ran dry a long time ago.

   The school is in a small building that used to house farm workers.
   Teachers and parents have joined forces to try to make it work.
   Benches are made up of old planks balanced on brick stacks, and
   makeshift tables have been built from scrap wood. None of the three
   tiny classrooms has any windows or doors left. School fees are 20,000
   Zimbabwean dollars a term--or 11 American cents at the black-market
   exchange rate--but some parents cannot afford even that. The teacher
   says that a third of children in the area do not go to school at all.

   Nearby, two of his pupils are staring up a tree, slingshots in hand.
   They are hunting a monkey, their only chance of eating meat. The
   youngest, wearing shorts that reveal his bony legs, says they manage
   two meals a day: tea and bread, when available, for breakfast, and
   maize porridge later in the day. His battered shoes are far too big
   and the laces are tied around his ankles to keep them from flying off.
   He lives 4km (2.5 miles) away and walks to school.

   In another part of Mashonaland, a white commercial farmer tries to
   hang on, having lost the bulk of his farm to a senior government
   official and a few war veterans. He is one of the 350 or so commercial
   farmers thought to be left, from 4,500 before the government started
   redistributing land in 2000. A portrait of Mr Mugabe hangs on the
   office wall and he maintains good relations with local officials. The
   farmer points out that he is not fighting land redistribution itself.
   But some buildings (including his own house), valuable equipment and
   crops already planted have been taken over as well, so he is fighting
   that in court.

   He has scaled back cash crops such as wheat and maize massively, and
   focuses on exports of citrus and tobacco, which bring much-needed
   foreign exchange. The next crops will need to be planted soon.
   Uncertain about the farm's future, he ponders over whether to make the
   investment. From 1,200 workers, he now employs only about 500. "We are
   going one way," he says. "Down."

   The farm no longer makes money, but cheap government loans and heavily
   subsidised diesel help to keep him going. He also plants and harvests
   on neighbouring farms, which have been reallocated to black owners,
   and gets half the crop. Many new landowners find that reselling their
   subsidised diesel on the black market is far more lucrative than
   farming.

   Presidential and parliamentary elections in Zimbabwe are scheduled for
   next March. The ruling party has been accused of leaning on
   traditional chiefs to control rural voters. Road-blocks in Mashonaland
   are frequent. In Chegutu, close to Mr Mugabe's home, shops are
   depressingly bare, and the struggling local factories and farms have
   laid off workers. But after years of intimidation, the opposition has
   almost disappeared. There is little visible security presence. Not so
   in Marondera, 45 minutes south-east of Harare, where the much-feared
   youth militia roam the streets and the atmosphere is tense.

   Voter registration has just finished. The Zimbabwe Election Support
   Network, a local NGO, reports serious irregularities, with rural
   voters loyal to ZANU-PF registering in cities, presumably to dilute
   support for the opposition, strongest in urban areas. But Zimbabweans
   will no doubt be cheered to know that the SADC's leaders, at the end
   of their Lusaka summit, wished elections next year to be free and
   fair.

