
   The surge of American troops has dramatically reduced violence. But
   Iraq's politicians may still squander an obvious chance for
   reconciliation

                                                                       AP

                                     AP


   AFTER more than three years as an interpreter for American troops in
   the city of Falluja, Dave (not his real name) recently had his hair
   cut for the first time by a local barber. Since then, several American
   marines based inside the city of some 300,000 people have also had
   their crew-cut domes locally shaved to a gleam. Six months ago they
   would have had their throats slit--and so, almost certainly, would the
   barber.

   But times have changed dramatically. Once widely considered the most
   dangerous and xenophobic city in Iraq and one of the country's most
   resilient havens of al-Qaeda, Falluja is now enjoying a new, if
   tentative, peace. So, no less strikingly, is the whole of Anbar
   province, in which Falluja lies, and most of the Euphrates river
   valley. The Americans say that if you go north and north-west through
   Hit and Haditha and up to the border with Syria near the town of Qaim,
   it is clear that al-Qaeda has been chased out--with the co-operation
   of the local Sunnis and the tribal leaders. In those areas, which
   embrace the vast majority of Iraq's Sunni Arabs outside Baghdad,
   attacks against the American-led coalition forces have dropped more
   than tenfold compared with a year ago.

   The peace in Falluja is fragile, as it is in the Sunni parts
   elsewhere. There is no knowing what would happen if the Americans left
   in a hurry. It is unclear whether al-Qaeda in Iraq (known in Western
   military circles as AQI) has been truly defeated or is biding its
   time. Nor is it certain that the local Sunni tribal leaders who have
   struck security deals with the Americans across Anbar province would,
   if the Americans left, make war or peace with the Shia-dominated
   government in Baghdad.

   But however temporary it may prove to be, it is an extraordinary
   change. In the precinct of Nazal--one of Falluja's nine, each with a
   joint American-cum-Iraqi police station--locals watch warily as a
   dozen helmeted young American marines, their guns pointed at the
   ground, tramp slowly past, avoiding puddles of sewage and piles of
   rubbish (much favoured by insurgents as a place for planting roadside
   bombs), and smiling at the knots of ragged children who shout
   "Chocola, meester" and are sometimes given pencils instead.

   After every ten steps or so, the marines swivel round and walk
   backwards, giving themselves a maximum field of vision. A couple of
   local Iraqi volunteers, clad in blue jeans and without helmets,
   accompany the patrol. Locals politely exchange salaams; veiled women
   with babes in arms retreat hastily behind high metal doors. But the
   marines say the mood has been transformed. No marine has been killed
   in Falluja since the summer's surge. The patrol stops from time to
   time as its leader, a fresh-faced corporal from Chicago, engages
   passers-by, via Dave, the newly coiffed interpreter from Baghdad, in
   amiably stilted badinage. A boy is asked about football. A shopkeeper
   talks about his oranges, and how business is only slowly improving.
   The Shia-led government in Baghdad, it is plainly believed, is loth to
   give much help to the Fallujans, with their reputation for Sunni
   extremism.

   After the Americans' ten-day attack on Falluja in November 2004, much
   of the city was a mess of rubble; despite a spate of building that
   started in the summer, also thanks to the surge, the marks of
   destruction are still visible everywhere. At least 1,500 Islamist
   militants, most of them members of AQI, many of them foreign, were
   said to have been killed in the siege, but until this spring the city
   remained a smouldering hub of insurgency.

   The turning point, apparently, was the al-Qaeda suicide-bombing of a
   policeman's funeral in May, when at least 27 locals were killed.
   Suddenly, it seems, the people began to react against al-Qaeda's
   excesses--the enforcement of strict dress codes, the banning of music,
   even (it is said) the cutting off of smokers' fingers--and were ready
   to endorse the local sheikhs' deals with the American army, even
   though it had pulverised their city.

   Al-Qaeda on the defensive

   Falluja is still not back to normal. A curfew remains in force. Just
   five entry points, guarded by American soldiers alongside Iraqi
   police, oversee access into the city. Each precinct is like a gated
   community. Every car must have an identity badge to be let in. Even
   so, a bombmaker occasionally gets through. "They're waiting and
   watching," says an American lieutenant.

   Moreover, the rest of Iraq, like Falluja, is still far more dangerous
   for Americans and other foreigners than it was in the first few months
   after the invasion of 2003, before the insurgency got going. The
   entire nerve-centre of the American administration, staffed by some
   10,000 people, remains walled off in Baghdad's so-called "green zone".
   Few foreign diplomats get out and about. Western journalists use a web
   of Iraqi reporters, but their movements are still restricted. Several
   of Baghdad's best-known streets remain off-limits to traffic.

   However, it is clear that the al-Qaeda part of the insurgency, which
   is manned almost entirely by Iraqis though its suicide-bombers and its
   strategists may still be foreign, has been hard hit. Although in
   November more than 20 civilians were killed on an average day, mainly
   by sectarian violence, that is far less than the toll a year ago, when
   the discovery of as many as 100 corpses at dawn was not unusual. An
   independent website, [4]icasualties.org, while admitting that Iraqi
   civilian deaths are hard to count, puts the figure of Iraqi security
   forces and civilians killed in November at around 560, compared with
   more than 3,000 last February. American military deaths since October
   are less than a third of the figure a year ago.

   All the indicators suggest that violence has subsided sharply nearly
   everywhere, not just in Anbar, but also in Baghdad. The border
   crossing to Syria near Qaim has opened after several years' closure.
   The oil pipeline from Kirkuk, which goes north into Turkey and should
   carry more than a fifth of Iraq's oil exports, has been flowing almost
   without a break for the first time in years; in 2006, it was open for
   barely 40 days. "We are close to a sustainable level of violence,"
   says the overall commander of the American-led forces, General David
   Petraeus. He means that fears of a murderous sectarian meltdown have
   receded, though he gives constant warning that things could slip back
   again.

   Meanwhile, the Shia heartlands around Karbala and Najaf have been
   quiet since a bloody bout of intra-Shia sectarian violence in Karbala
   in August. Since September, when the British left the centre of Basra,
   Iraq's second city, which is 95% Shia, violence there too has dipped
   very sharply--and the British, now encamped at an airport outside the
   city, are being fired on some ten times less than before.

   The Kurds are also at peace, despite the hiccup in October and
   November, when the Turkish army threatened to invade in force in order
   to clobber the Kurdistan Workers' Party (PKK), a group of
   Turkish-Kurdish guerrillas who use a remote and rugged strip of Iraqi
   Kurdistan's borderland as a haven. The exception is the disputed city
   of Kirkuk, where ethno-sectarian violence, mainly between Kurds and
   Sunni Arabs, shows no sign of abating.

   But a bitter battle is still being fought upstream along the Tigris
   river valley and its tributaries, up to Mosul and beyond. The
   mixed-sect province of Diyala is probably today's bloodiest cockpit,
   where the Americans and their allies in the Iraqi security forces are
   fighting an array of Islamist and nationalist insurgents with al-Qaeda
   again to the fore.

   The surge is by no means the sole reason for Iraq's improved security.
   A truce was called in August by the biggest and perhaps bravest of the
   Shia militias, the Mahdi Army, better known to the American-led
   coalition by its Arabic acronym JAM (from Jaish al-Mahdi), whose
   gunmen are known as JAMsters. This in turn may have helped turn Sunnis
   against al-Qaeda; facing fewer attacks from the Shia militias, they
   had less cause to embrace a ruthless Sunni protector.

   The Sunni awakening

   But the biggest reason is probably the agreements that the Americans
   have struck in Anbar province with Sunni tribal leaders who have
   formed a group known as al-Sahwa (the Awakening). The Americans have
   armed some 65,000 Sunnis, with another 12,000 or so keen to sign up,
   in tribal battalions known in coalition-speak as "Concerned Local
   Citizens" (CLCs). These groups have also set up militias in some
   suburbs of Baghdad, mainly in the capital's west, where the Sunnis had
   hosted al-Qaeda with varying degrees of reluctance in the face of a
   sectarian onslaught. Some 12,000 Shia are also said to be poised to
   join CLC groups to co-operate with the Americans elsewhere.

   The Americans are also freeing thousands of the 25,000-odd detainees
   they hold on suspicion of being insurgents (quite separately from the
   thousands more in Iraqi government custody). In the past few months
   some 3,000 have been let out, and imams have been helping to persuade
   those about to be freed to disavow AQI.

   Yet another reason is what a senior British officer calls "a huge
   change in American behaviour" since the wily and thoughtful General
   Petraeus took up his post in January. Efforts to co-operate with local
   imams, to respect local culture, to hire more locals as interpreters
   and to increase the number of Arabic-speakers on American military and
   civilian staffs have borne fruit. It helps, too, that the American
   ambassador, Ryan Crocker, is an experienced Arabist who can also speak
   a bit of Farsi.

                                                                      AFP
                                                                      AFP

                                             Not quite ready to take over

   In Falluja, female officers are deployed to question and search women.
   American soldiers there almost never go into mosques. But befriending
   imams is now a priority. Earlier this week, one of Falluja's leading
   imams, Sheikh Nazar, who has been a critical ally against al-Qaeda,
   officiated at the opening of a revamped police station. "If we lose
   him, we lose the lot," says a marine lieutenant.

   It is plain that many of the CLC and tribal groups previously
   supported--indeed were part of--the national or "honourable"
   resistance to the occupation and have simply switched sides, seeing
   that, at any rate in the short run, the Americans could protect them
   against Shia militia depredations. But many insurgent groups apart
   from al-Qaeda are still fighting against the Americans and their
   allies. Some analysts have counted more than 75 of them. Certain
   prominent groups, such as the 1920 Revolutionary Brigades, named after
   an uprising soon after the British invented Iraq as a country, say
   they are simply waiting for the surge and the lull to end before
   erupting again. Others among these fractious bands are talking to the
   Americans, and may yet make peace.

   A golden opportunity

   What is clear, in any event, is that there is a gaping window of
   opportunity for economic, diplomatic and political progress. On the
   economic front, most development had been stymied by insecurity. Now
   projects are starting to go ahead. Electricity in Baghdad is on for up
   to 12 hours a day, against eight hours six months ago. Oil production,
   though still not at its pre-war level, has climbed from its trough of
   1.75m barrels a day in January last year to more than 2.5m b/d today.
   Shops are reopening in many parts of Baghdad, and businessmen are
   hopeful, though foreign investors have yet to return.

   On the diplomatic front there are hints of progress, too. American
   generals have cautiously noted an apparently greater readiness on the
   part of Syria to clamp down on al-Qaeda and the traffic of insurgents
   across its border. Iran, too, may be stanching the flow of weaponry to
   its Iraqi Shia militia friends. More broadly, there is a growing
   acceptance, both by Iraq's government and by the Americans, that
   political progress requires a regional framework in which Iraq's key
   neighbours--Saudi Arabia, Syria, Turkey and Iran--can play a part. The
   United Nations is back in greater numbers, with a high-class envoy,
   Staffan de Mistura, ready to help, especially with tricky issues such
   as provincial polls and the question of Kirkuk.

   So Iraq's politicians at last have a chance to use the breathing space
   provided by the surge and by the Awakening to accommodate each other.
   Several issues are ripe for resolution. An oil law, to divide revenue
   equitably while giving regions (especially the Kurdish one) some
   freedom to grant exploration and management contracts locally, has
   been in the offing for more than a year. A revised deBaathification
   law, to bring back officials from the Saddam Hussein era into public
   service, is under scrutiny, along with a pensions law to give such
   officials a better deal.

   Perhaps most important, a provincial-elections law is under
   discussion. This could lead the way to new elections in the spring,
   enabling the newly "awakened" Sunnis of western and northern Iraq to
   empower themselves, especially in budget matters; last time round, in
   January 2005, they boycotted the elections. If they had real power in
   their provinces, they might drop their fierce opposition to
   devolution, which they have hitherto seen as a Western device to
   fragment their country.

   Alas, there has so far been no sign that the government of Nuri
   al-Maliki is poised to grab this opportunity. Indeed, as an adviser to
   General Petraeus glumly describes it, "The politics is going nowhere."
   The government still acts like a collection of competing fiefs, not a
   body that speaks with a national voice. Even among Shias, a paralysing
   factionalism has, if anything, got worse. The two principal Shia
   parties, Mr Maliki's Dawa and the better-organised Islamic Supreme
   Council of Iraq (ISCI), both fear the mass appeal of Muqtada al-Sadr,
   who has stayed out of government but often calls the shots on the
   streets.

   Worse, Mr Maliki is still failing to reach out effectively to the
   Sunnis. The main Sunni block in parliament, which had a clutch of
   ministries in the ruling coalition, continues to take no part in
   government. Relations worsened recently when a son of Adnan
   al-Dulaimi, a leader of the biggest Sunni block in parliament, was
   arrested with some 30 of his father's personal guards on suspicion of
   involvement in insurgent bombings. To cap it all, the Sunnis are
   sorely divided too--and not just over al-Qaeda. The main Sunni block
   in parliament is deeply wary of the Awakening in Anbar, which may
   displace it as the authentic voice of the Sunnis nationwide.

   Mr Maliki himself sounds particularly hostile to the notion of the
   CLCs--the mainly Sunni tribal militias--being inducted into the
   security forces or civil service as part of the price of peace. The
   new Shia establishment hates the arming of the Sunni militias because
   it thinks they may one day turn their guns against the Shias.

   The current edgy lull is due in large measure to a series of local
   deals cut between the American army (and the British army in Basra)
   and groups close to the insurgents, with the centrally run state
   thereby diminished. Indeed, it can be argued that such deals are
   eroding the state and its fragile institutions still more. But it may
   be the only way to go.

   A tendency to disagree

   The fundamental flaw in Iraqi politics persists. The new Shia order
   remains loth, after centuries of oppression, to give the Sunnis a
   decent slice of power; and the minority Sunnis seem unable to accept
   second place in a devolved state. Last week a deputy prime minister, a
   Sunni, denied that Shias outnumber Sunni Arabs.

   In his memoir of service as a British diplomat, among other places in
   Baghdad in the 1960s, Sir Donald Hawley characterises the Iraqis thus:

     [They] are a very talented, intellectual people and have no lack of
     experts on many subjects. They have a tendency, however, not to
     agree with one another and are no strangers to violence. Late at
     night after several strong whiskies, they could be very frank on
     many subjects, including themselves, and would sometimes grow quite
     maudlin. We are a very bad people and very difficult to govern. Did
     we not kill Ali [the Prophet Muhammad's son-in-law, whom the Shias
     revere]? Did we not kill Hussain [his son]? Very few have
     successfully dominated us...Nuri Said [the pro-British prime
     minister, assassinated in 1958] too knew how to govern Iraq," they
     would say. It is an Iraqi trait to admire strength and to respect
     it for the stability it can give.

   Mr Maliki has a last chance to change things for the better. Iraq's
   battered people are yearning for their politicians to make up. But
   some things do not change.

