
   Iraq's Kurdish soldiers have been welcomed in parts of Baghdad

                                                                      AFP
                                                                      AFP

                                                A Kurd with an Iraqi flag


   BRISTLING with weapons, the men arrived on the back of three pick-up
   trucks, then surrounded the modest house in the once "mixed" suburb of
   al-Amel, in western Baghdad. A black-clad gunman jumped down and
   hammered on the thin metal gate. There were "bad people" on the loose,
   he shouted to the residents cowering inside. They should pack up and
   go and live "among your own people--for your own protection". He and
   his men would helpfully put their belongings on the back of the
   trucks. For safety's sake, the family should go immediately. As this
   ultimatum was being given to the terrified Sunni Arab family by the
   Shia gunmen, a group of Iraqi policemen, also Shias, leant on a police
   car and idly puffed away on their cigarettes, just 50 yards up the
   street, indifferent to the crime of sectarian cleansing being
   perpetrated under their noses.

   That scene has become all too common in al-Amel--and in many other
   mixed districts. Since the bombing of the Shias' shrine in Samarra,
   north of Baghdad, in February last year, many mixed and middle-class
   areas have become either mostly Shia or mostly Sunni, depending on
   which side of the main road you live.

   Yet on the occasion described above the Sunni family managed to sit
   tight, in the house they had built some 30 years ago in what was then
   a palm grove. They were saved by the arrival, in the nick of time, of
   a contingent of about 100 Kurdish soldiers, some of the 3,000-odd
   former peshmerga fighters (literally, "those who face death") who have
   joined Iraq's national army and have been controversially deployed in
   Baghdad as part of the "surge" of troops, mainly American ones, to
   beef up security in the bloody capital.

   As they neared the besieged house, the Kurdish soldiers shot over the
   heads of the Shia gunmen, identified by locals as members of the Mahdi
   militia loyal to a Shia firebrand, Muqtada al-Sadr, and told them to
   leave the area. They swiftly complied. There was no American soldier
   in sight.

   It is still too soon to say, three months after the surge began,
   whether it is working. Only about half the promised extra 22,000-plus
   American troops earmarked for Baghdad have arrived. Sectarian murders,
   mainly of Sunnis by Shia militias, are fewer; but bombings, including
   suicide ones, by Sunni- and al-Qaeda-linked insurgents, are more
   frequent. The overall death toll is down a bit but is still horrific.

   But in the mixed areas of the capital where Kurdish troops
   incorporated into the national army have been deployed, residents and
   American officers notice a definite drop in sectarian cleansing and
   violence. People's confidence in the security forces, they say, has
   improved. In al-Amel more shops are opening up again; a semblance of
   normal daily life has resumed. Some expelled Sunni and Shia families,
   though still just a trickle, have returned.

   "The Kurds are welcomed here by the people," says a Sunni Arab in
   al-Amel. "They want to restore order. They are more polite than the
   Americans and not as dangerous as the Shia militias." General Nazir
   Goran, a Kurd who commands an Iraqi army brigade in the capital, says
   that his men have been operating effectively in some of the capital's
   "hot zones", mainly in western Baghdad. But they still feel obliged to
   avoid the areas of eastern Baghdad controlled by the Sadrists.

   In any case, the first loyalty of the Kurds inducted into the national
   army is to their Kurdish homeland and its regional government, not to
   the Iraqi state. Iraqis of all stripes generally reckon that the Iraqi
   army is less under the influence of Shia groups than are the police,
   which have been heavily infiltrated by Shia militiamen. Most army
   recruits are Shias and Kurds; less than a tenth of the officers are
   Sunnis.

   The decision to send Kurdish units of the Iraqi army to Baghdad was
   controversial in Kurdistan. Many Kurds worry that the deployment will
   drag them into the sectarian conflict between Sunni and Shia Arabs.
   Other Kurds say, "It's not our battle." But so far they have been
   welcomed by a surprising number of Iraqi Arabs, even though they have
   often viewed the Kurds as a threat to Iraq's fragile unity.

