
                                                                       AP

                                     AP

   George Bush is heading off for a tour of the Middle East. He will not
   be greeted as a conquering hero 

   THE smart people are getting out of Jerusalem next week. Traffic
   mayhem is assured as George Bush and his entourage, about 800 souls,
   guarded by thousands of Israeli police, are whisked about in a fleet
   of armoured vehicles, complete with a bespoke helicopter brought in to
   fly the president to Capernaum, in northern Israel, where Jesus chose
   his apostles.

   What is less clear is what Mr Bush will bring his hosts apart from
   gridlock. The man who hoped his invasion of Iraq in 2003 was going to
   bring peace to Palestine and democracy to the Arabs has not exactly
   over-achieved. So the main aims of the tour he begins on January 8th
   are more limited: to give a nudge to the Israeli-Palestinian peace
   talks he launched in Annapolis in November (see picture) and to shore
   up America's allies against Iran.

   At the Annapolis summit, Israel's prime minister, Ehud Olmert, and the
   Palestinian president, Mahmoud Abbas, promised to talk fearlessly to
   one another about "final status" issues such as borders, Jerusalem and
   refugees. But these talks have already been soured by familiar
   complaints. While expressing gratitude for a big boost in foreign aid
   inspired by Annapolis and co-ordinated by Tony Blair, Mr Abbas will no
   doubt tell Mr Bush that Israel's recent announcement of new tenders
   for housing in West Bank settlements jeopardises the fledgling talks.

   Mr Bush may listen sympathetically, but is unlikely to apply strong
   public pressure to Mr Olmert. One reason for that is that America and
   Israel may be rather more focused on what to do about Iran. Efforts to
   impose further economic sanctions on the Islamic Republic have begun
   to falter since an American National Intelligence Estimate declared in
   December that Iran probably ceased secret work on nuclear weapons in
   2003. Mr Olmert needs to know whether this finding has neutralised Mr
   Bush's threat of military action against Iran, and how America would
   react if Israel were to launch an air strike on its own. "Whatever Mr
   Bush tells him will be the basis for some very tough decisions in the
   Israeli security cabinet," says Yaacov Amidror, a former head of the
   Israeli army's research division.

   The American president may also be called upon to help repair
   relations between Israel and Egypt. Israel has lately accused Egypt of
   allowing the Islamists of Hamas to smuggle guns and fighters
   unhindered into the Gaza Strip, from where the Palestinians routinely
   fire rockets into Israeli towns. Egypt, furious, accuses Israel of
   sabotaging its relations with America.

   America's Congress recently cut $100m of the $1.3 billion in annual
   military aid for America's biggest Arab ally. That came atop other
   slights that have strained Egyptian-American ties, such as Mr Bush's
   occasional--and nowadays increasingly infrequent--criticism of Egypt's
   appalling record on democratisation and human rights. Hosni Mubarak,
   Egypt's president of the past 26 years, has been annoyed enough to
   break, during Mr Bush's second term, from his habit of paying yearly
   visits to the United States. It will not be easy for Mr Bush to mend
   relations with Egypt at the same time as passing on Mr Olmert's
   complaints about Gaza.

   Mr Bush can expect a warmer reception in the Gulf, where he is to
   visit Kuwait, Bahrain, Saudi Arabia and the United Arab Emirates. With
   the exception of Kuwait, the Gulf monarchies have strongly disagreed
   with Mr Bush's Iraq policies but share his anxieties about the role of
   Iran. Last year Mr Bush promised big new arms transfers to these
   countries. And their misgivings about him may lately have been
   tempered a little by Annapolis and the apparent success of his "surge"
   of American troops in Iraq in restoring some calm there.

   For his part, Mr Bush will want to reassure himself that the Gulf
   Arabs are not beginning to wobble on Iran. In December these staunch
   American friends invited Iran's president, Mahmoud Ahmadinejad, to
   address their annual summit in Manama, and Saudi Arabia hosted him
   during the haj pilgrimage to Mecca. Mr Bush will be keen to make sure
   that his allies are not straying too far towards appeasement of the
   Shia power across the Gulf. His Arab friends, for their part, will try
   to convince Mr Bush that they believe Iran can be better managed by
   persuasion than by threat, or at least that incentives should be part
   of the diplomatic mix. They have reasons to worry. Bahrain, the home
   port for America's Fifth Fleet, has lately experienced unrest among
   its politically marginalised Shia majority.

   They'll always have Petraeus

   A "surprise" descent by Mr Bush into Baghdad may also be on the cards.
   That would enable him to congratulate General David Petraeus on having
   delivered a significant reduction in violence in Iraq and to scold the
   Shia-dominated government of the ailing Nuri al-Maliki for having
   failed to use this as an opportunity to move towards political
   reconciliation with the Sunnis.

   Perhaps the only item on Mr Bush's agenda likely to meet with
   consensus on all his travels is Lebanon, where a year-long proxy
   struggle between America and Syrian-backed factions risks degenerating
   into outright strife. But though Mr Bush's friends in the region
   concur that the Syrian regime is bad, and that its Iranian-backed
   protégé in Lebanon, Hizbullah, is dangerous, none seems sure about how
   to counter Syria's deeply entrenched interests.

   Mr Bush is bound to be politely received by all the region's leaders
   even though, like other Americans before him, he has chosen to tour
   the Middle East very late in his presidency (Richard Nixon paid a
   visit just days before resigning to avoid impeachment). Unlike
   previous presidents, however, Mr Bush remains an even more unpopular
   leader on the Arab street than he is at home. He will have to do more
   than kiss and smile to change that.

