
   Why has the country's national prosecutor been suspended?


   AS THE business of nominating candidates for the leadership of the
   ruling African National Congress (ANC) gets under way this week, the
   atmosphere, already clouded by arguments over who should succeed
   President Thabo Mbeki as party leader, is turning nastier. Mr Mbeki
   recently suspended Vusi Pikoli, head of the National Prosecuting
   Authority (NPA), who oversees an investigative unit known as the
   Scorpions, for an "irretrievable breakdown" in relations with his
   boss, the justice minister.

   It has since been reported that, before his suspension, Mr Pikoli had
   taken out a warrant to arrest Jackie Selebi, who heads the South
   African police. An inquiry has now been launched into whether Mr
   Pikoli--but not Mr Selebi--should be fired. But the government has
   been so vague and tight-lipped about Mr Pikoli's suspension that it is
   feeding a host of conspiracy theories that could affect the ANC's
   selection, in December, of the party's next president. Whoever wins
   that contest is virtually certain to become the country's next leader
   too.

   Mr Pikoli has overseen the most recent bout of the NPA's six-year
   investigation into the activities of Jacob Zuma, the country's former
   deputy president, who was fired in 2005 but still seeks South Africa's
   top job. Charges of corruption and fraud against Mr Zuma were
   dismissed last year. But the NPA has not ruled out the possibility of
   charging him again.

   The Scorpions, set up in the late 1990s to investigate corruption and
   organised crime, have been accused of abusing their power and being
   used to settle political scores. Critics say they should be disbanded
   or absorbed into the police. A government-appointed commission
   suggested they be kept within the NPA but report to the minister of
   safety and security.

   Mr Selebi has been under fire for some time for the country's
   breathtaking level of violent crime. Calls for his sacking became more
   strident when he admitted to being a friend of Glen Agliotti, a
   suspected crime boss arrested by the Scorpions. They have been
   investigating Mr Selebi, who insists his hands are clean and has kept
   his job.

   The opposition has been demanding a fuller explanation, so far in
   vain. Mr Pikoli secured impressive conviction rates. But did he
   overstep his authority? He is said to have kept his boss in the dark
   over several big cases, including Mr Selebi's. And people disagree
   over what the NPA's independence really means. The opposition has
   questioned the independence of the inquiry into whether Mr Pikoli is
   fit for the job, since it is being headed by an ANC veteran and former
   speaker of parliament, Frene Ginwala.

   Was Mr Pikoli's suspension due to the arrest warrant? People in the
   president's office deny that the decision was meant to protect Mr
   Selebi and refuse to say whether a warrant for his arrest was ever
   obtained. So does the NPA. But Mr Mbeki's reluctance to explain things
   more fully has fuelled suspicions that state institutions are subject
   to the vagaries and bitter rivalries of ANC politics.

