
   Curbing dangerous nuclear technologies gets trickier

   WHEN Russia announced it had started shipping low-enriched uranium
   fuel to power the civilian nuclear reactor it is helping Iran build at
   Bushehr, George Bush tried to squeeze some comfort out of a piece of
   news which--for the international effort to curb Iran's nuclear
   ambitions--was a disappointing about-turn. "If the Iranians accept
   that [Russian] uranium for a civilian power plant, then there's no
   need for them to learn how to enrich," he said on December 17th.

   True, in theory. But Iran refuses to follow such logic. By making
   long-delayed fuel shipments to Bushehr now, Russia will weaken further
   the UN Security Council effort to end Iran's defiance. It also risks
   undermining plans to limit the spread of dangerous nuclear
   technologies at a time when many governments, including a number in
   the volatile Middle East, plan to invest in nuclear power.

   Iran's president, Mahmoud Ahmadinejad, insists Iran will not stop its
   own fuel-making: another 50,000 or more will eventually be added to
   the 3,000 centrifuge machines now spinning at its uranium-enrichment
   plant at Natanz. These, say its nuclear officials, will provide
   low-enriched uranium (used for making electricity, but at higher
   enrichment levels for bomb-making) for a separate, indigenously built
   360MW reactor at Darkhovin, in the province of Khuzistan.

   This is a puzzle. Iranian engineers are already building a 40MW
   "research" reactor at Arak that is worryingly too big for research,
   too small for electricity generation and ideally suited to produce
   plutonium (another bomb ingredient) from its spent fuel, but they lack
   skills both in reactor design and in the manufacture of the larger
   parts needed for power reactors, says Gary Samore of the New
   York-based Council on Foreign Relations. Unless Iran gets outside help
   (the Arak designs were provided by freelancing Russian scientists),
   Darkhovin could be just an excuse for Iran's continuing its own
   enrichment work.

   With Iran so obdurate, why the changed tack over Bushehr? In 2005
   Russia said no fuel would go while questions remained about Iran's
   peaceful intentions. But inspectors have plenty of those.

   Holding back on the fuel for Bushehr was one bit of Russian leverage
   in the nuclear dispute with Iran that is now being lost. Similarly, Mr
   Bush's refusal to take the option of a strike against Iran's nuclear
   facilities off the table seems a lot less credible since a recent
   National Intelligence Estimate (NIE) concluded that Iran had suspended
   some elements of a weapons programme in 2003. (Israel and some
   European governments are worried those efforts may have resumed; and
   they and American officials point out that at the very least Iran
   persists with its potentially weapons-usable enrichment work.)

   Russia's decision on fuel shipments was made before the NIE was
   published. Commercial concerns may have tipped Russia's hand, says
   Mark Fitzpatrick of the London-based International Institute for
   Strategic Studies, a think-tank. It wants to be seen as a reliable
   supplier, so as to pick up more reactor contracts from others. Russia,
   America, some Europeans, Japan and others with advanced nuclear
   fuel-related technologies also have ideas for fuel-supply services and
   spent-fuel management as an incentive for governments not to follow in
   Iran's nuclear footsteps. But Russia is helping Iran show you can have
   it all.

