
                                                                       AP

                                     AP

   Mahmoud Ahmadinejad thinks Iran is home free


   AS FAR as George Bush is concerned, "Iran was dangerous, Iran is
   dangerous and Iran will be dangerous" if it gets sufficient knowledge
   to build a nuclear bomb. But his words this week were barely audible
   above the clamour detonated by a new National Intelligence Estimate
   (NIE), the collective judgement of all 16 of America's intelligence
   agencies, that Iran had halted its nuclear weapons programme in the
   autumn of 2003. To Iran's irrepressible president, Mahmoud
   Ahmadinejad, the report was a "great victory"--an own thumb-in-the-eye
   for the Great Satan.

   At the very least, the spooks' reassessment of Iran's ongoing nuclear
   work seems likely to put a brake on already slow diplomatic efforts
   through the United Nations Security Council to pressure Iran into
   suspending its enrichment of uranium and its efforts to produce
   plutonium. Although a new resolution promising stiffer sanctions on
   Iran may still be circulated soon, both Russia and China say that the
   new NIE version of events means at a minimum a bit of a rethink.

   Yet it's a funny thing. Although the new judgement on Iran's weapons
   work contradicts a 2005 NIE view that Iran was tinkering on
   regardless, the intelligence folk have not changed their prediction
   that Iran could have a nuclear weapon by around 2015. So does Iran
   have such military ambitions? And if so, why the presumed four-year
   pause?

   When intelligence types talk of Iran's weapons programme, what they
   mean is work to design a nuclear warhead, master the mechanics to make
   it go bang and covertly produce the highly-enriched uranium or
   plutonium for its explosive core. In 2002 much of Iran's
   hitherto-secret uranium work, including its centrifuge-enrichment
   plant at Natanz, was exposed by an opposition group. Iran then came
   under mounting pressure to suspend such work and let in inspectors
   from the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA). The intense
   scrutiny, the intelligence analysts think, caused Iran to halt its
   other nefarious activities too.

   Yet, as a leaked speech by a senior Iranian nuclear official later
   made clear, Iran was not abandoning enrichment, only ducking and
   weaving to get the world off its back. Uranium and plutonium work, it
   insists, are legal under the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty--for
   peaceful purposes. The enrichment go-slow ended abruptly in 2006,
   however, with the election of Mr Ahmadinejad. Iran now has 3,000
   centrifuge machines up and running at Natanz.

   Does that matter if all the other work has stopped? Producing enough
   plutonium or highly enriched uranium (power reactors use the
   low-enriched sort, but this can be enriched to weapons grade by
   running it through the centrifuges a few more times) is the chief
   obstacle to building a bomb. Halting the obviously illegal work, while
   pressing ahead with enrichment in plain sight would still leave Iran
   with a weapons option, argued George Perkovich of the Carnegie
   Endowment for International Peace, a Washington think-tank, back in
   2005. The new NIE assessment comes to a similar conclusion.

   Iran claims never to have had any intent to build weapons. The NIE
   disagrees. America is even more firmly convinced on the evidence it
   has obtained--some of it quite recently--that until 2003 Iran's
   government was trying to build a nuclear weapon. It was "probably
   worse than we thought", says Stephen Hadley, Mr Bush's national
   security adviser.

   It always was implausible that a country without a single working
   nuclear-power reactor would spend so heavily on, and be so secretive
   about, uranium enrichment. The IAEA still wants to know more about
   unexplained traces of highly enriched uranium found by inspectors and
   a document Iran had for years, but claims never to have made use of,
   showing how to shape uranium metal into hemispheres, a technique
   useful only for weapons. Inspectors also want Iran to account for
   drawings dated 2003 from a laptop provided to America by a defector
   the following year that show design work on a missile cone that could
   accommodate a nuclear warhead. Iran dismisses such evidence as
   "baseless".

   The latest NIE assessment expresses "moderate confidence" that Iran's
   weapons pause continues. Israel's defence minister, Ehud Barak, this
   week begged to differ. He acknowledged that the odds on an eventual
   American military strike against Iran's nuclear facilities have
   lengthened, but said Israel would not lower its guard "because of an
   intelligence report from the other side of the world, even if it is
   from our greatest friend." Intriguingly, while the director-general of
   the IAEA, Mohamed ElBaradei, expressed himself pleased with the NIE
   reassessment, the New York Times quoted a senior official close to the
   agency as expressing more scepticism about what Iran is really up to.

   So where does diplomacy go from here? The NIE suggests that the
   weapons pause may indicate more of a cost-benefit approach to Iran's
   nuclear ambitions, and that some cleverer combination of scrutiny and
   pressure, combined with juicier offers to take account of Iran's
   security, prestige and other goals might prompt its regime to steer
   clear of further weapons work--though it could reverse course at any
   time. Yet that has been the basic diplomatic strategy all along: get
   Iran to halt enrichment and negotiate inducements, including
   co-operation on other advanced, but less dangerous, nuclear
   technologies, to make the suspension permanent. Mr Ahmadinejad firmly
   rules this out. Ironically, this week's NIE will make it harder to
   muster the diplomatic wherewithal to press him to change his merry
   tune.

