
   The opposition's surprising acceptance of Robert Mugabe's latest
   clever move

   ROBERT MUGABE appears once again to have wrong-footed those who have
   been trying to oust him. Britain's prime minister, Gordon Brown, is
   trying to prevent Zimbabwe's president from attending a much-heralded
   summit meeting of the African Union and the European Union in
   December. Mr Brown says he will not attend if Mr Mugabe does. But it
   seems clear that most African governments will stay away if Mr Mugabe
   is excluded. Portugal, the summit's host, is apparently likely to bow
   to African pressure and hold the summit whether or not Mr Brown shows
   up. And British officials hint that even if Mr Brown stayed away,
   other ministers would almost certainly attend.

   Better still for Mr Mugabe, both factions of Zimbabwe's divided
   opposition, the Movement for Democratic Change (MDC), have recently
   sided with the ruling party, ZANU-PF, endorsing some controversial
   constitutional amendments that may well strengthen its grip. This has
   dismayed many of the lobbies--human-rights campaigners, churches,
   women's groups and so on--that usually back the MDC, further
   fracturing an already crumbly opposition.

   The amendments proposed by the ruling party allow Parliament, which is
   dominated by ZANU-PF, to choose a successor if the president steps
   down or dies before the end of his term. Simultaneous parliamentary
   and presidential elections look set for March 2008. Seats in the lower
   house will increase from 150 to 210, and constituencies will be
   redrawn. This will favour rural areas, where ZANU-PF's grip is tighter
   than in the towns. The ruling party gave ground by agreeing to limit
   the president's power to appoint some members of parliament; a
   supposedly revamped electoral commission will be in charge of
   redrawing constituencies.

   Until now, the MDC had strongly opposed the amendments on the ground
   that they would entrench the ruling party ahead of the election. The
   MDC had insisted on a new constitution, the repeal of repressive
   security and media laws, and for Zimbabwe's diaspora, thought to be
   more than 3m-strong, to be allowed to vote. Some pro-reform
   organisations are aghast at the MDC'S reversal. The National
   Constitutional Assembly, a lobby that for a decade has called for a
   new constitution, accuses its former ally of treachery.

   For its part, the MDC calls its volte-face a confidence-building
   gesture. It has been talking to ZANU-PF under the auspices of Thabo
   Mbeki, South Africa's president, who was asked in March by the
   14-country Southern African Development Community (SADC) to help solve
   Zimbabwe's crisis. Behind its official policy of united support for Mr
   Mugabe, the regional grouping is divided. The British say that a
   change of mood was noticeable at the latest SADC summit, in Lusaka in
   August, and that countries like Tanzania and even Namibia that were
   previously loth to challenge Mr Mugabe have begun to see his refusal
   to budge as damaging the whole region.

   So SADC has hailed the constitutional deal as a breakthrough.
   Enthusiasts point to reports that ZANU-PF may relax (though not
   repeal) the media and security laws and work towards a new
   constitution--at some stage. Some also argue that letting Mr Mugabe in
   effect pick his successor would make him likelier to step down.
   Negotiations between his party and the MDC continue, but it is unclear
   whether Mr Mugabe's lot will make serious concessions.

   Divide and rule

   The opposition is weaker than ever. It has been unable to stir up the
   millions of victims of Zimbabwe's economic catastrophe. The MDC
   faction headed by Arthur Mutambara said in July that attempts to unite
   the party and field a single presidential candidate had failed. He
   denounced Morgan Tsvangirai, the party's founder and head of the other
   faction, as "weak and indecisive". Meanwhile, many of the party's
   mostly urban supporters have left the country: in all, a quarter of
   the population may have gone. The MDC's allies look weak too. A recent
   strike call by the Congress of Trade Unions was largely ignored. Other
   groups' efforts to hold marches and protests have fizzled; people have
   long been cowed by the beatings and arrests routinely inflicted by the
   regime.

   Despite reports that the latest registration of voters was badly
   flawed, Mr Mbeki and some of his fellow leaders in the region are keen
   for next year's elections to be deemed reasonably fair, after which
   they hope that Mr Mugabe will step down and ZANU-PF will draw one of
   the MDC factions, probably the one led by Mr Mutambara rather than Mr
   Tsvangirai, into a coalition. That, they hope, will pave the way to an
   internationally-backed recovery. Whether Mr Mugabe is contemplating
   such a scenario is another matter.

