
                                                                       AP

                                     AP

   A green jamboree in Indonesia will not achieve anything tangible, but
   it matters

   IF SIZE is a measure of importance, the meeting of the United Nations
   Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC) that starts in Bali on
   December 3rd is a big deal. Somewhere between 15,000 and 20,000
   politicians, officials, activists and journalists are expected to
   attend, stretching the Indonesian island's resources to
   breaking-point. "It's a nightmare for those of us who are actually
   working on the agenda," says an official who is attending. "We won't
   be able to get internet access or food." The recent floods in parts of
   Indonesia (shown above) may help concentrate minds.

   The numbers of people pouring into Bali next week do at least
   demonstrate that the political profile of climate change has risen
   over the past year. Nobody whose job touches on global warming can
   afford to be absent. And the issue that the meeting is primarily
   about--how the world should try to mitigate climate change when the
   Kyoto protocol runs out in 2012--is crucial.

   The omens, too, are good. Those who support a global agreement along
   the lines of Kyoto, based on targets for cutting greenhouse-gas
   emissions, got a boost from the results of the Australian elections.
   Kevin Rudd, the country's new prime minister, has promised to reverse
   his predecessor's policy and ratify Kyoto.

   But expectations for Bali are low, and are being managed downwards
   before the meeting. "Disappointment may come in a variety of different
   guises," says an official. Those, like the EU and the NGOs, who want a
   global deal are not even looking for a road map for the post-2012 era.
   They will be happy if they manage to stop America, OPEC or the
   developing countries creating serious roadblocks.

   It is not surprising that Bali is unlikely to achieve anything
   tangible, for it is aimed at the hardest part of climate-change
   mitigation--getting an international agreement which all the big
   emitters ratify. That won't happen until America adopts serious
   domestic emissions-control measures.

   But encouragement from the international front would ease the passage
   of such measures considerably. So what happens at Bali matters, though
   the declaration that comes out of it will be encrypted in diplomatic
   language, and the difference between success and failure will be
   imperceptible to the untrained eye.

   Experienced code-breakers will be looking, essentially, for three
   things by which to judge whether Bali has been a success or a failure.
   The first is some sort of long-term commitment by all 192 signatories
   of the UNFCCC to deal with the problem, involving some sort of goal,
   such as temperature, emissions cuts or atmospheric carbon
   concentrations. The second is further commitments by developing
   countries to cut their emissions. The EU already committed itself to
   cuts of 20% below 1990 levels by 2020 at its spring conference earlier
   this year; and since the current American administration continues to
   oppose binding targets, such promises will have to come from other
   rich countries, such as Australia or Japan.

   The third area concerns developing countries. They are not going to
   commit themselves to cuts. But activists hope that China and
   India--the nations everybody is watching--may throw America a bone. If
   the big developing countries agree to look into cutting emissions from
   particular sectors--an idea that the Bush administration has
   pushed--rather than from their economies as a whole, America will be
   likelier to commit itself to emissions controls. After all, it was the
   developing world's refusal to countenance cuts that led America to
   turn its back on Kyoto in the first place.

   This is all familiar territory to climate-change aficionados. But
   there is one area in which the Bali meeting may break new ground:
   deforestation.

   The Kyoto protocol established a mechanism (see [3]article) under
   which developing countries that cut their industrial emissions can
   sell those reductions to rich countries. But developing countries have
   no incentive to stop cutting down their forests, and tropical
   deforestation accounts for around 20% of total annual greenhouse-gas
   emissions. So a group of heavily-forested countries have been lobbying
   to get paid for not cutting down their green canopies.

   This initiative has met plenty of opposition, and not just from the
   many who point out that designing a scheme to pay people not to do
   something is tricky. Brazil, home of the world's largest expanse of
   tropical forest, has also been wary of the idea. It was instrumental
   in designing the Clean Development Mechanism, which it is doing very
   nicely out of, and it fears that flooding the market for carbon
   credits with new supply from tropical forests would depress the price
   and destroy the mechanism. It is also uncomfortable about the
   implication in an "avoided deforestation" programme that its forests
   are the whole world's property.

   But as Brazil has come to take the issues of both climate change and
   deforestation more seriously, so its opposition to such a programme
   has moderated. That, and the world's realisation that without
   addressing deforestation, mitigating climate change will be
   exceedingly difficult, has brought forests to the fore.

   Even on deforestation, though, there will not be a concrete agreement.
   The best that can be expected is--to use UN parlance--a commitment to
   look into creating incentives to discourage countries from chopping
   down their tropical forests. International diplomacy is a horribly
   slow business; and some such statement is probably a necessary first
   step towards, eventually, packing away the chainsaws.

