
   Protesters and governments are mastering the tricks of the mobile
   trade 

   BACK in September, protesters from many parts of the United States
   poured into the small town of Jena, Louisiana, to express their anger
   over the over-zealous prosecution (as they saw it) of six young
   African-Americans on charges of assault. Mobile-phone text messages
   played an important role in pulling in the crowd.

                                                                      AFP

                                    AFP

                   Summoned by cells: the Louisiana march

   But for pioneers of mobile telephony and texts as tools of protest and
   dissent, simply summoning people to demonstrations--a technique first
   deployed in the Philippines as long ago as 2001--is old hat. The
   search is on for ever more creative ways to use this ubiquitous
   device.

   At a recent conference in São Paulo on "mobile activism"--a term that
   embraces humanitarian work as well as protest--there was much talk
   about how to "go beyond text" when using mobile phones. And it became
   clear that exuberant practice was galloping ahead of theory. One
   recent craze has been the use of political ringtones. Once again,
   Filipinos are in the vanguard. Since 2005 that country's best-known
   tone, especially among youngsters exasperated by corruption, has been
   "Hello Garci"--a snatch of taped conversation in which President
   Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo seems to be chatting with Virgilio Garcillano,
   her election organiser, ahead of the 2004 poll that confirmed her in
   office. In Hispanic countries, meanwhile, the latest fashion is a
   royal voice saying "Why don't you shut up?"--the recent outburst of
   Spain's King Juan Carlos to President Hugo Chávez of Venezuela at a
   summit in Santiago, Chile.

   Mobiles are also being used in more sophisticated ways, to capture and
   disseminate images that were never supposed to see the light of day.
   Witness, a non-governmental organisation that aims to record and
   denounce human-rights abuses, is one pioneer. Instead of merely
   posting verbal reports, it invites visitors to its [3]website to the
   "Hub"--a collection of harrowing video clips, often uploaded from
   mobiles, which depict cruelty in action. On the "Egypt" country page,
   there are grainy images showing torture in a prison.

   For now at least, expense and technological problems make it hard to
   organise any international mobile-based protest. The lack of full
   interoperability between mobile systems means that borders are still
   difficult to cross. But efforts are under way to get round that
   problem. For example, FrontlineSMS, a laptop-based (and thus portable)
   technology has been designed for use almost anywhere. Early this year
   it was deployed in the monitoring of elections in Nigeria. Voters
   texted complaints to a computer where they could be processed and
   cross-checked by monitors from international bodies such as the
   European Union.

   More recently FrontlineSMS was used in Pakistan to get round curbs on
   information flowing in and out of the country. Both there and in
   Myanmar (Burma) recent disturbances have produced some interesting
   insights into the cat-and-mouse games of protesters and political
   masters.

   In Pakistan the equipment used by local authorities was too cheap to
   block the flow of text messages. This helped Pakistani protesters to
   stay informed about sympathetic rallies taking place in America and
   Britain--and to give the outside world a glimpse of ordinary people's
   reactions to the state of emergency.

   During the recent protests in Myanmar, the authorities temporarily
   suspended text messaging altogether. That did not stop activists from
   using expensive satellite phones, which are harder to shut down. The
   political, and above all, economic cost of blocking text messages was
   relatively low in Myanmar, because not many people use mobiles. But in
   many other developing countries, shutting mobile systems would be
   economically disastrous and politically costly, because so many small
   businesses depend on them.

   In some places, like Belarus, the authorities have refined the art of
   blocking mobile coverage in specific places--such as protest venues.
   They have also turned text messages to their own uses: by using the
   state-owned network to spread warnings that a rally is likely to end
   in bloodshed.

   For hard-pressed activists in search of new techniques, help may come
   from an unlikely quarter. Google, the internet giant, has offered $10m
   for the most innovative new application for mobile phones. The offer
   extends to ideas that bring humanitarian benefits or contribute to
   economic development. Mobile activists have never lacked imagination,
   and many of them are already hard at work, thinking of clever new uses
   for those little devices--mostly rather crude, five-year-old
   models--that have become part of daily life in the poorest parts of
   the world.

