
                                                                      AFP

                                    AFP

   Numbers mean power, which is why counting people is so controversial

   "GO, NUMBER Israel from Beersheba even to Dan; and bring the number of
   them to me, that I may know it." It was not the first census described
   in the Bible, nor the last, nor yet the most renowned. But for reasons
   that are obscure, King David's order to Joab, the commander of his
   army, went against God's will and both men knew it. The count was
   carried out all the same, and was followed by a heavy punishment:
   70,000 Israelites died of the plague before the Lord relented and
   accepted burnt offerings as a token of David's repentance.

   Taking a census thus came to be known as the sin of David, and was
   long regarded as best avoided. In 1634 Governor John Winthrop of the
   Massachusetts Bay Colony estimated the local population rather than
   counting it exactly, telling a correspondent: "David's example stickes
   somewhat with us." And when a Census Bill was debated in Britain in
   1753, Matthew Ridley, the member of Parliament (MP) for Newcastle,
   gave a speech saying that there was among the people "such a violent
   spirit of opposition to this Bill, that if it be passed into a law,
   there is a great reason to fear, they will in many places oppose the
   execution of it in riotous manner."

   But nobody needed David's dreadful example to persuade them that
   censuses were a bad idea. From the point of view of those being
   enumerated, nothing good could come of being counted. The usual
   reasons for wanting the numbers were war and taxes. From the
   sovereign's point of view, such information was crucial: the decision
   to go to war could be taken only once it was known how many men could
   be conscripted and how much money levied. So the results were highly
   sensitive, and an enemy country's numbers would be useful when
   deciding whether attacking it was prudent, and conquering it
   worthwhile. The results of a Swedish census in the mid-1700s appear to
   have been made a state secret because of such fears.

   But at the same time men were becoming enamoured of numbers and taking
   to counting as a way of answering pressing questions of their own.
   Following the London plague of 1603, weekly Bills of Mortality began
   to be published, listing all the deaths in the city and, from 1629,
   their causes. According to John Graunt, whose 90-page book
   interpreting and drawing conclusions from these bills is generally
   regarded as the earliest statistical analysis, they were used by the
   rich to "judge of the necessity of their removall" and by tradesmen to
   "conjecture what doings they were like to have". And in 1731 Benjamin
   Franklin published in the Pennsylvania Gazette, the newspaper he
   edited at the time, an account of all the ships that entered and left
   the big northern colonial ports, together with their destinations, so
   that the reader could "Make some Judgment of the different Share each
   Colony possesses of the several Branches of Trade".

   It was revolution that renewed the impetus for rulers to count their
   people. The American war of independence brought a new nation into
   being, and it was not only one that was made up of separate states,
   each keen to get full credit for its relative size, but also one whose
   population was on the move. In order to decide how many
   representatives each state should send to the new Congress, there was
   only one thing for it: their populations would have to be counted, and
   that count would have to be repeated regularly.

   America's first census was carried out in 1790, and it was
   groundbreaking in many ways. It was the first to be mandated in any
   country's constitution. It was also the occasion for America's first
   presidential veto, exercised by George Washington on the advice of
   Thomas Jefferson, whom he had asked to examine the proposals for
   sharing out congressional seats between the states. Jefferson--a man
   so fond of enumeration that he once wrote to a friend that he had "ten
   and one-half grandchildren, and two and three-fourths
   great-grandchildren", and that "these fractions will ere long become
   units"--criticised them for being unclear about how this
   "apportionment" was to be carried out. He advised Washington that a
   completely unambiguous method should be chosen and enshrined in
   legislation.

                                                                      AFP
                                                                      AFP

                                                  They want to know what?

   The fact that this thriving new nation counted its citizens without
   provoking divine retribution may have given courage to other Christian
   countries. Over the following decade Denmark, England, the
   Netherlands, Norway and Sweden all instigated regular censuses of
   their own.

   People started finding the sorts of patterns in the resulting
   data--life expectancies, crime rates, causes of death, and the mix of
   religions and races--that are now part of our familiar mental
   furniture. In the 1800s, for instance, two French statisticians, André
   Michel Guerry and Adolphe Quetelet, analysed the tables of crimes
   against individuals and property that had recently started to be
   published. They were astonished by the hitherto-unsuspected
   regularities they found. Guerry was particularly struck by the fact
   that the method by which someone committed suicide could be predicted
   from his age. The author of an English commentary on his work
   described his findings thus: "The young hang themselves; arrived at a
   maturer age they usually blow out their brains; as they get old they
   recur again to the juvenile practice of suspension."

   Quetelet was equally amazed by the regularity with which the various
   types of crime were committed. "We can enumerate in advance", he
   wrote, "how many individuals will stain their hands in the blood of
   their fellows, how many will be forgers, how many will be poisoners,
   almost as we can enumerate in advance the births and deaths that
   should occur." Such regularities, he claimed, left no role for free
   will in human affairs. "Society prepares the crime", he wrote in 1832,
   "and the guilty person is only the instrument."

   Opposition to this line of thinking came from Charles Dickens, who
   loathed all arguments based on numbers and averages, charging that
   they were used to legitimise indifference to other people's suffering.
   His strongest broadside against those who thought that counting people
   was a good way to answer social questions came in his novel "Hard
   Times". When Tom, the hard-hearted Gradgrind's son, is found to be a
   thief, he uses his father's statistical determinism to shrug off
   responsibility. "So many people, out of so many, will be dishonest. I
   have heard you talk, a hundred times, of its being a law. How can I
   help laws? You have comforted others with such things, father. Comfort
   yourself!"

   The future, though, belonged to those like another ardent social
   reformer, Dickens's near-contemporary, Florence Nightingale (see
   [3]article). Best remembered for nursing wounded soldiers in the
   Crimean war, her sanitary reforms were based on meticulous records of
   hospital admissions, illnesses, treatments and outcomes. Rather than
   painting moving pen-portraits of soldiers left to rot on stinking,
   louse-ridden pallets in a hospital built on an open sewer--as Dickens
   would no doubt have done--she used death rates to campaign,
   successfully, for change.

   Nowadays, a census is part of the standard equipment of a functioning
   state. In 1995 the UN called for all member nations to hold a census
   in the following decade. Yet counting people remains a sensitive
   business for two reasons, connected with the ambiguous character of
   government. Where government is oppressive, people want to keep out of
   censuses, lest information they provide is misused. Where government
   provides, people want to be in censuses, and to boost their numbers,
   in order to claim a larger share of the goodies.

   Include me out

   History offers good reason for worrying about the misuse of
   information. The Nazis used population records to round up Jews into
   concentration camps. As a result, Germans are still prickly about
   being counted. When in the 1980s their government added new questions
   to the census, there was a public outcry and the constitutional court
   struck it down on the grounds that it conflicted with a "fundamental
   right to informational self-determination". Although the country is
   planning a census in 2011--its first since reunification--it will not
   be a full count, but only a sample. Respondents' surnames will be
   deleted as soon as possible and all data that could identify an
   individual will be erased once statisticians have finished with them.
   Questions on race and religion will not be included.

                                                             Getty Images

                                Getty Images

   Fears that the data might be used for purposes other than the declared
   ones may have undermined China's most recent census in 2000. This
   involved 6m enumerators visiting around 350m households in just ten
   days. They asked some rather personal questions, such as "How much did
   you pay for your home?" and "How often do you wash?" But it was the
   standard ones about the number of residents in each household and
   their sex and age that provoked the most anxiety. The government
   wanted to find out whether the country's gender imbalance was
   primarily due to the abortion and infanticide of females, or whether
   many of the missing girls were in fact alive and being concealed. To
   encourage parents to register over-quota children, it reduced the
   penalties for anyone found to have flouted the one-child law. Some
   also contend that large numbers of peasants who migrated illegally to
   the big cities will have hidden from the enumerators, and that there
   may be as many as 100m uncounted Chinese on top of the 1.3 billion the
   census found.

   It isn't just oppressive governments that misuse information. In early
   2007 researchers found proof of what had long been suspected: that
   during the second world war the American census bureau had played a
   part in the internment of Japanese-Americans by passing some of their
   names and addresses to the secret service.

   Other people's money

   In autocracies, people try to keep out of censuses. In democracies, by
   contrast, they want to be in them, for censuses mean numbers, and
   numbers mean money and power. The American census, for example,
   determines how around $200 billion a year of federal funds is shared
   out, for everything from education and welfare to highways. Such rich
   pickings mean that censuses are well worth fighting over.

   Although Jefferson ensured the American states could not squabble
   about the formula used for apportionment, he could not have predicted
   the partisan rows about how to deal with undercounting. No census
   counts everyone, and the uncounted are not drawn uniformly from all
   walks of life. The poor, the homeless, immigrants and ethnic
   minorities are missed more often. The 1990 census is thought to have
   missed one native American in eight.

                                                             Imaginechina
                                                             Imaginechina

   The statisticians' solution is to follow each census with a quality
   check, surveying representative areas to create a picture of those
   overlooked in the full count and correcting the figures accordingly.
   Perhaps unsurprisingly, in light of the profile of those most likely
   to be missed, Democrats find the intellectual arguments in favour of
   such adjustment more compelling than Republicans do. Before the census
   in 2000, the Supreme Court ruled that sampling-adjusted figures could
   not be used for apportioning congressional seats. But the row over
   whether they should be used to share out cash raged until 2001, when
   the census bureau finally declared the raw figures good enough to
   stand unaltered.

   In Britain the 2001 census was corrected using such sampling
   techniques, but some areas still complain that they are being
   undercounted. In the decade between censuses, the national statistical
   office updates the figures with estimates of external and internal
   migration. Some towns with lots of foreigners are convinced that large
   chunks of their population are being overlooked, losing them millions
   of pounds of government money. The MP for Slough, a town to the west
   of London full of Poles, poetically told Parliament in January that
   the increasing "amount of shit that goes through our local sewers" was
   evidence that her constituency was being sold short.

   Some groups are begging to be counted because they hope to prove their
   importance and increase their influence with government. Church
   leaders in Britain were gratified when the 2001 census, the first to
   ask about religion, found that 70% of the population identified
   themselves as Christian. They reckoned this was a large enough
   majority to justify their religion's special place in state-run
   education. Whether the figures bear the weight that has been put on
   them is, however, questionable. Church attendance figures suggest that
   few of these self-identified Christians attend services more than once
   a year, or indeed at all. And the irreverence with which some
   respondents treated the question can be judged by the 390,000
   people--0.7% of the population--who answered it by claiming to be
   Jedi.

                                                  [spacer.gif] [gray.gif]
                                                             [spacer.gif]
      Some groups are begging to be counted to prove their importance and
                                                increase their influence 
                                                             [spacer.gif]
                                                               [gray.gif]

   Dashed hopes of gaining a higher profile caused despondency among gay
   and lesbian groups when it was decided not to add a question about
   sexual orientation to Britain's next census, to be held in 2011.
   Government statisticians were keen, but they were stymied by the
   difficulties of phrasing a question that would neither offend people
   nor leave them in the dark about what was being asked. They were
   mindful of the reaction to a question on self-perceived sexual
   identity in a recent survey by the Metropolitan Police. The most
   common query it provoked from respondents was: "What's
   heterosexuality?"

   That British gays wanted to stand up and be counted says much for
   national tolerance. It is hard to imagine the same happening in
   Nigeria. There, the dispute is about who will get the oil money. The
   country has not had an uncontested census since gaining its
   independence in 1960. Civil war and poorly trained enumerators have
   been formidable obstacles to a reliable count. The most recent census,
   in 2006, omitted questions about religion and tribe following demands
   from leaders in the largely Muslim north. Christians in the south, who
   believe they have been undercounted in the past, threatened a boycott
   unless the questions were asked. The census found 140m people: 75m in
   the oil-poor north and 65m in the revenue-poor south. Politicians in
   the north endorsed the figures; those in the south did not.

   In India, the arguments are not about money, but about a different
   sort of resource: the jobs and university places handed out under the
   government's affirmative-action programme. Many dalits, or
   untouchables, have tried to escape the discrimination they face in
   Hinduism by converting to Christianity or Islam. But this means no
   longer being eligible for the programme--a restriction on religious
   freedom, say some, and indeed court challenges are wending their way
   through the system. Rather than being neutral in this dispute, the
   census form took sides by allowing respondents to indicate their caste
   as dalit only if they claimed to be Hindu, Sikh or Buddhist.

   The shakier the state, the fiercer the rows about censuses, for
   numbers affect how power is distributed. In Iraqi Kurdistan, for
   instance, a census due to happen in 2007 was delayed. It was intended
   to correct figures distorted by Saddam Hussein's "Arabisation"
   programme, which forced many Kurds to leave and others to declare
   themselves Arab. If and when an Iraqi census happens, it will not only
   give a truer picture of the ethnic mix in a contested region, but will
   also have consequences for billions of dollars in oil revenues.

   Lebanon has not held a census since 1932, when it counted the number
   of adherents to various religions in order to share out power under a
   system known as confessionalism. Since that time its demography has
   changed and the politically favoured Christians are now believed to be
   in a minority. Plenty of powerful people are keen to keep that quiet,
   so the prospects for a new official count are dim.

   Counting can be even more dangerous than being counted. In 1936 Stalin
   told his officials that the following year's census would find a total
   population of 170m--a figure that took no account of his slaughter of
   millions in famines and purges. But the enumerators found only 162m
   people, and also revealed other unwelcome facts, including that nearly
   half the population of this avowedly atheist country was religious. So
   Stalin denounced the count as a "wrecker's census" and had the census
   takers either imprisoned or shot. A new count in 1939 came up with a
   similar total, but this time officials wisely classified the results
   and gave Stalin his figure of 170m.

   That Stalin insisted on this charade is a backhanded testimony to the
   way counting introduces people to themselves. "The interest and
   significance of the census for the community lie in this," wrote Leo
   Tolstoy of the Moscow census of 1882: "that it furnishes it with a
   mirror into which, willy nilly, the whole community, and each one of
   us, gaze." The faces that look back can surprise us still.

