
   Electronic activism is stirring a lot of citizens into life, whatever
   leaders think 

   WHATEVER might unite or divide them, George Bush, Vladimir Putin and
   the other leaders of the G8 nations will have a fresh topic for small
   talk, and perhaps serious talk, when they meet in Germany this summer.

   They and their underlings will all have been bombarded with e-mails
   from every country in the world urging them to take faster action over
   climate change--in a campaign mounted by [3]Avaaz.org, a new web-based
   protest movement which aspires to be the biggest and broadest such
   organisation in a crowded field.

   The newly founded movement claims to have nearly 1m members already,
   after pooling resources from three of the world's most successful
   mobilisers of e-protest: America's [4]Moveon.org (which gave important
   help to some Democrats in last year's congressional election), [5]Res
   Publica (an American-based, but globally-minded advocacy movement
   which often reflects the "religious left") and Australia's
   [6]GetUp.org.au, which has used billboards and sky-writing as well as
   e-mails to campaign for things like refugee rights and the release of
   an Aussie (arrested in Afghanistan in 2001) from Guantánamo Bay.

   As television viewers in Berlin, Delhi, Paris and Washington, DC will
   have noticed in recent days, Avaaz.org has chosen global warming as
   the focus of its first big campaign. It has paid for TV advertisements
   which show George Bush, Vladimir Putin and Jacques Chirac lying fast
   asleep while evidence of climate change swirls all around them.
   Viewers are invited to visit the Avaaz site and push the necessary
   button to give the world leaders a deafening wake-up call.

   Ricken Patel, the Canadian-British director of Avaaz--a name which
   means "voice" in several languages--says one of the intentions is to
   act as a lightning rod during "moments of global consciousness" such
   as the aftermath of the 9/11 terrorist attacks or the 2004 tsunami. He
   cites the battle against AIDS, curbs on landmines and poor-world debt
   forgiveness as issues on which the thinking of the powerful has
   already been swayed by grass-roots activism, much of it electronically
   co-ordinated.

   But there are catches, aren't there? As the e-protest movement grows
   broader, its focus will surely become less sharp. After all, everyone
   can agree that governments should "do more" about climate change, but
   when it comes to choosing between specific responses it may be harder
   to teach the world to click in perfect harmony.

   And there is no reason to assume that global e-campaigns will always
   be mounted in "progressive" causes: what about e-movements for the
   death penalty, or for more curbs on immigration? But the founders of
   Avaaz do have at least one argument on their side. Voters' faith in
   old-fashioned parties is at a low ebb in many democracies. One of the
   proudest boasts by GetUp, the Australian movement, is that it has more
   members than any of the country's parties have signed-up members.
   E-protest may or may not disrupt the sleep patterns of world leaders;
   but it has already made life more interesting for hundreds of
   thousands of jaded citizens.

