
   The growing danger of falling between the cracks of geopolitics and
   war 

   THEY are people who struggle to make their voice heard, but the world
   is likely to hear more and more about them. If they all belonged to
   one nation, it would be a fair size, as big as Chile or Kazakhstan.
   Yet by definition, they belong to no country at all: they are the
   world's growing band of stateless people who have no citizenship
   rights, and are often unable to claim the things that states can
   provide, like travel documents and education. According to
   international officials whose job is to cope with human flotsam and
   jetsam, the problem of statelessness is growing fast, despite a modest
   decline in the number of refugees in the strict sense.

   In a cautious estimate, the office of the United Nations High
   Commissioner for Refugees reported that in the course of 2006 the
   number of stateless persons had climbed from 2.4m to 5.8m. That was
   one reason for a recent spike (see chart) in the number of "people of
   concern" to the UNHCR. A better guess for the stateless, says Maureen
   Lynch of Refugees International, an aid agency, is at least 11m; some
   UNHCR officials say the total figure, using looser criteria, could be
   15m.

   Some people become stateless because they are forced out of one
   country, and no other nation will accept them, or even grant them the
   rights which "refugees"--people who seek shelter because of a proven
   risk of persecution--can claim. Some people never leave home but find
   they are stranded by a shift in borders. Also ranked among the
   stateless are marginal groups who cannot claim civic rights because
   their births went unrecorded.

   As a classic case of statelessness, take the Biharis of Bangladesh.
   They mostly took the West Pakistani side in the 1971 war that led to
   the creation of Bangladesh, ensuring that they were unwelcome in the
   new state. Some were moved in organised exchanges--until Pakistan
   stopped taking them. Perhaps 300,000 remain stateless.

   In fact, legal limbo is not an either-or condition; there are degrees
   of statelessness. Among the Palestinians (and their descendants) who
   fled during the war that followed Israel's creation, some--those in
   Jordan--were given passports, but in other Arab states, they simply
   got "refugee travel documents". No Arab state wanted to naturalise the
   newcomers, but their level of rights has varied from place to place.

   In 1991, in newly free Estonia, those inhabitants (mainly Russians)
   who were there as a result of the Soviet occupation could claim
   citizenship only if they passed a language test. Many have. The
   remainder are not wholly without rights; they may vote in municipal
   elections, for example. A "non-citizen" of law-abiding Estonia may
   enjoy more state protection than a subject of some ramshackle place
   where state power is either absent or murderous.

   Still, there are some strange, avoidable forms of statelessness that
   reflect quirks of history. When the Arab Gulf states were formed, some
   used tribal affiliation rather than borders to determine citizenship.
   This left many stateless, including the bidoun ("without" in Arabic)
   of Kuwait; perhaps 100,000 people who cannot prove their family's
   residence in Kuwait since 1920, and thus cannot become citizens under
   a harsh 1959 citizenship law. The situation is exacerbated by a
   feature common to all but three Arab states: mothers married to
   non-citizens cannot claim citizenship for their children. The bidoun
   forfeit the amenities that the oil-rich emirate showers on its
   citizens, including education.

   António Guterres, the current high commissioner for refugees, says
   more and more countries agree, at least, that statelessness is a
   problem; and several have taken steps to alleviate it. One happy story
   is that of Nepal, where poverty and isolation had left some 3.4m
   people, some ethnically non-Nepali, outside the purview of the state.
   This year, the government managed to register 2.6m of them.

   Elsewhere, legal changes are easing the problem. Egypt, Morocco and
   Algeria have altered their family law to allow mothers to pass on
   their citizenship. Bangladesh's government has recommended giving
   citizenship to the Biharis. Even Kuwait is tackling the bidoun; there
   was a parliamentary enquiry into the issue in 2006 and a promise, this
   year, to begin widening citizenship, initially to a mere 2,000 people.

   But a 1961 convention on reducing statelessness has been signed by
   just 34 countries, most recently by New Zealand, Rwanda and Brazil.
   Many states are wary of losing sovereignty or undertaking expensive
   obligations. Welcome as they are, the recent efforts to tackle the
   problem fall far short of what is needed to put into practice the 1948
   Universal Declaration of Human Rights, which lays down that every
   human being is entitled to a nationality.

