
   Vladimir Putin's recent diatribe against America reflects the deeply
   resentful attitude the former superpower has towards the remaining one

                                                                       AP

                                     AP


   ONE way to understand Russia's bloody history is to see it as an
   oscillating tussle between forces bent on emulating the West and those
   resolved to shun it. For much of the 20th century, the chief object of
   Russian admiration and revulsion has been the United States--the
   country that, with its combinations of fissiparous diversity and
   fierce patriotism, insularity and messianic sense of destiny, Russia
   arguably most resembles. After the rushed, giddy embrace of American
   ideas in the 1990s, the anti-Western impulse has again become
   increasingly conspicuous during the presidency of Vladimir Putin.
   Judging by his speech at a conference in Munich on February 10th, the
   ascendancy of this old reflex is now complete.

   Addressing Robert Gates, America's defence secretary, John McCain, a
   Republican senator, Germany's Chancellor Angela Merkel and other
   bigwigs, Mr Putin gave a blunt précis of Russian grievances with
   America. "Unilateral and frequently illegitimate actions," he said,
   had "caused new human tragedies and created new centres of tension."
   The world, Mr Putin added, was witnessing "an almost uncontained hyper
   use of force", which was plunging it into "an abyss of permanent
   conflicts". Lest anyone mistake him, he specified that "the United
   States has overstepped its national borders in every way," exhibiting
   "a greater and greater disdain" for international law. This was
   fuelling an arms race and driving some countries to acquire weapons of
   mass destruction.

   None of this was strictly new: Mr Putin and other Russian officials
   have made all these points before. But the tone, forum and
   concentration of his criticism distinguished this outburst. Other
   denunciations of America have been more periphrastic ("comrade wolf
   knows who to eat," Mr Putin said obliquely last year, "and he eats
   without listening to others"). He probably meant to cause a stir in
   Munich even before Mr Gates last week listed Russia's "uncertain path"
   among America's military concerns. And he succeeded.

   Two questions stand out amid the fury and incredulity that Mr Putin's
   speech provoked. First, how did it come to this? After he and George
   Bush met for the first time, in 2001--when both were greenhorn leaders
   with questionable mandates--Mr Bush famously said he had looked into
   his counterpart's soul, and liked what he saw. Mr Putin's solidarity
   after the September 11th terrorist attacks seemed to augur a new era
   in Russian-American relations. Less than six years on, they seem to
   have reached a post-Soviet nadir. The second question is, how much
   deeper might they sink?

   In their early enthusiasm for Mr Putin, some diplomats clearly made a
   classic error in Western thinking about Russian leaders: wishful
   thinking. What some saw as a strategic choice for partnership with
   America seems, for the Kremlin, to have been instead a tactical
   alliance. In return for what the Russians saw as
   concessions--tolerating America's military presence in Central Asia;
   swallowing NATO's expansion to Russia's Baltic border--the Russians
   expected something back. Instead, they feel, there was mounting
   criticism of their domestic affairs, disdain for their views on Iraq
   and resistance to the international ambitions of Russian companies.

   Mr Putin's assault, from 2003, on the Yukos oil company and its boss,
   Mikhail Khodorkovsky, helped to bring these resentments to the
   surface. But the most important watershed came in autumn 2004. After
   the Beslan school massacre, something in Mr Putin seemed to snap; he
   denounced unnamed foreign powers that, he said, were intent on
   weakening Russia. Then came the Kremlin's cack-handed efforts to
   intervene in Ukraine's presidential election. The Russians saw their
   defeat in Ukraine as evidence of perfidious American meddling in
   Russia's sphere of influence. For the Americans, the debacle showed
   that a truth plain in Mr Putin's domestic policies--that he was not a
   real democrat--would affect his country's foreign behaviour too.

   Russia's domestic politics explain Mr Putin's Munich performance as
   much as do his foreign frustrations. As the president nears the end of
   his constitutional term, he is determined--says Fyodor Lukyanov of
   Russia in Global Affairs, a journal--to prove that on his watch
   "Russia has returned to the global arena." The presidential handover
   in 2008 will be a risky period in the highly personalised system of
   government Mr Putin has created: the old foreign bogeyman may help.

   But the main impact of the big domestic changes under Mr Putin--power
   corralled in the Kremlin, and an oil-fuelled economic revival--has
   been to engender a self-confidence unprecedented since Soviet times.
   Parliament, regional leaders, the media and once-uppity tycoons have
   all been domesticated (Mr Putin evidently did not see the irony of his
   complaint in Munich about "a world in which there is one master, one
   sovereign"). Much of Russia's foreign debt has been repaid. There is
   now no reason--no external obligations, no internal constraint--to
   stop him speaking as he pleases. That was clear at last year's G8
   summit in St Petersburg, when Mr Putin mocked Mr Bush over Iraq, and
   Tony Blair over a corruption scandal.

   Thus emboldened, the Kremlin is now as eager to be feared as liked. It
   feels it can strong-arm foreign energy companies, and object anew to
   things which Russia seemed to have accepted, like America's
   missile-defence plans. Even while asserting that their own strategic
   reach will not be diminished, Mr Putin and others have denounced the
   possible arrival of missile-defence kit in Poland and the Czech
   Republic. They also feel that the power Russia has recovered has to be
   demonstrated to be real--and preferably demonstrated to the diminution
   of America's. That partly explains Russia's behaviour in the Middle
   East, which Mr Putin visited this week, and where he again talked
   mischievously about setting up a "gas OPEC". In Munich he aired
   another telling theory, heard about the Kremlin recently: Russia did
   not lose the cold war but voluntarily ended it.

   These atavistic urges, misunderstandings and, in some cases (such as
   NATO expansion) legitimately conflicting interests, have created a
   diplomatic climate in which, when Alexander Litvinenko, a former
   Russian agent, was murdered in London last year, many people in
   America and elsewhere found it natural to assume that Mr Putin was the
   ultimate culprit (an assumption which, in turn, poisoned relations
   still further). The Munich conference, say some, may become the event
   that future historians will fix on--like Churchill's "iron curtain"
   speech in Fulton, Missouri, in 1946--as the moment when pre-existing
   tensions became explicit. Both Mr Putin and his defence minister,
   Sergei Ivanov, encouraged this epochal thinking by talking about a
   new, if virtual, "Berlin Wall". Kommersant, a Russian paper, observed
   that Mr Putin had only lacked a shoe, like the one once banged by
   Nikita Khrushchev at the United Nations.

                                                                       AP

                                     AP

   A hard crossing: the land route (via the Bering Strait) from Russia to
                                  America

   The Fulton analogy goes too far. For all its "petro-arrogance", as
   Dmitri Simes of the Nixon Center in Washington, DC, puts it, Mr
   Putin's Russia is not the Soviet Union. It has a permanent seat on the
   United Nations Security Council, which it can use to thwart American
   policy towards Iran and Kosovo (which may yet provide a pretext for
   even nastier Russian meddling in South Ossetia and Abkhazia, breakaway
   regions of Georgia). It has the biggest hydrocarbon reserves in the
   world, which can be used as "tools of intimidation and blackmail", as
   Dick Cheney alleged in an aggressive speech in Vilnius in May 2006, to
   which Mr Putin's Munich address was in part a riposte. It has lots of
   nuclear arms to underpin its self-esteem. But it does not have the
   conventional forces, nor the economic and ideological resources to
   compete with America globally as it did in the cold war. Rather than
   declaring another one, says Dmitri Trenin of the Carnegie Moscow
   Centre, Mr Putin was staking a claim to be the leader of the global
   opposition--calculating that Iraq made this a propitious time to
   announce Russia's candidacy.

   For the Americans, all that is troubling, but less than catastrophic.
   There are broadly two schools of thought on how to deal with Mr
   Putin's Russia, in Congress and within the administration. One wants
   to confront and even punish the Kremlin, for example by throwing
   Russia out of the G8; the other, to which Mr Bush mostly seems to
   belong, wants to remain congenial to enable co-operation in Iran and
   elsewhere. (In his most emollient Munich passage, Mr Putin recalled
   their early affinity by calling Mr Bush "my friend" and "a decent
   man".) America's reaction to Russia's presidential election--set to be
   more a coronation than a free choice--will be the litmus test of its
   Russia policy. Yet the bottom line is that Russia looms much smaller
   in Mr Bush's mind than vice versa.

   But there are two reasons to fear that the relationship is more likely
   to get worse than recover. One is what is sometimes called the "values
   gap". Mr Putin exposed this gap in Munich, when he aired some very
   Russian neuroses along with his standard critique of American power.
   He said the OSCE--an international body that has mildly and correctly
   criticised rigged elections in some ex-Soviet states--was becoming "a
   vulgar instrument designed to promote the foreign-policy interests of
   one or a group of countries." He again insisted that non-governmental
   organisations active in Russia but funded from abroad were the tools
   of foreign governments. In an interview this week with al-Jazeera, Mr
   Putin made plain the basic conviction underlying these moans: that all
   American talk about Russia's democratic failings was so much
   realpolitik. Critics of Russia's human-rights record, he said, "are
   using this kind of demagogy as a means to pursue their own
   foreign-policy goals in Russia."

   The other worry is that this gap applies not only to Mr Putin and the
   other ex-KGB types who make up much of his entourage, but to many
   ordinary Russians too. General Russian attitudes to America are
   hardening, and suspicion of American motives spreading, even as
   American-style comforts and living standards become more accessible.
   Alexei Levinson, a Russian sociologist, says many Russians exhibit a
   "deep ambivalence" towards America, which has persisted after
   communism's collapse.

   In fact, admiration and revulsion have always co-existed, albeit in
   varying proportions: Stalin himself recommended "the combination of
   Russian revolutionary élan with American efficiency." In a country
   whose media is as tamed as Russia's, public opinion is largely formed
   by government propaganda. But there is evidence--on the streets, as
   well as in opinion polls--that the crescent nationalism of Mr Putin's
   foreign policy is catering to the Russian mood as much as shaping it.

