
   What works in education: the lessons according to McKinsey

   THE British government, says Sir Michael Barber, once an adviser to
   the former prime minister, Tony Blair, has changed pretty much every
   aspect of education policy in England and Wales, often more than once.
   "The funding of schools, the governance of schools, curriculum
   standards, assessment and testing, the role of local government, the
   role of national government, the range and nature of national
   agencies, schools admissions"--you name it, it's been changed and
   sometimes changed back. The only thing that hasn't changed has been
   the outcome. According to the National Foundation for Education
   Research, there had been (until recently) no measurable improvement in
   the standards of literacy and numeracy in primary schools for 50
   years.

   England and Wales are not alone. Australia has almost tripled
   education spending per student since 1970. No improvement. American
   spending has almost doubled since 1980 and class sizes are the lowest
   ever. Again, nothing. No matter what you do, it seems, standards
   refuse to budge (see chart). To misquote Woody Allen, those who can't
   do, teach; those who can't teach, run the schools.

   Why bother, you might wonder. Nothing seems to matter. Yet something
   must. There are big variations in educational standards between
   countries. These have been measured and re-measured by the OECD's
   Programme for International Student Assessment (PISA) which has
   established, first, that the best performing countries do much better
   than the worst and, second, that the same countries head such league
   tables again and again: Canada, Finland, Japan, Singapore, South
   Korea.

   Those findings raise what ought to be a fruitful question: what do the
   successful lot have in common? Yet the answer to that has proved
   surprisingly elusive. Not more money. Singapore spends less per
   student than most. Nor more study time. Finnish students begin school
   later, and study fewer hours, than in other rich countries.

   Now, an organisation from outside the teaching fold--McKinsey, a
   consultancy that advises companies and governments--has boldly gone
   where educationalists have mostly never gone: into policy
   recommendations based on the PISA findings. Schools, it says[3]*, need
   to do three things: get the best teachers; get the best out of
   teachers; and step in when pupils start to lag behind. That may not
   sound exactly "first-of-its-kind" (which is how Andreas Schleicher,
   the OECD's head of education research, describes McKinsey's approach):
   schools surely do all this already? Actually, they don't. If these
   ideas were really taken seriously, they would change education
   radically.

   Begin with hiring the best. There is no question that, as one South
   Korean official put it, "the quality of an education system cannot
   exceed the quality of its teachers." Studies in Tennessee and Dallas
   have shown that, if you take pupils of average ability and give them
   to teachers deemed in the top fifth of the profession, they end up in
   the top 10% of student performers; if you give them to teachers from
   the bottom fifth, they end up at the bottom. The quality of teachers
   affects student performance more than anything else.

   Yet most school systems do not go all out to get the best. The New
   Commission on the Skills of the American Workforce, a non-profit
   organisation, says America typically recruits teachers from the bottom
   third of college graduates. Washington, DC recently hired as
   chancellor for its public schools an alumna of an organisation called
   Teach for America, which seeks out top graduates and hires them to
   teach for two years. Both her appointment and the organisation caused
   a storm.

   A bias against the brightest happens partly because of lack of money
   (governments fear they cannot afford them), and partly because other
   aims get in the way. Almost every rich country has sought to reduce
   class size lately. Yet all other things being equal, smaller classes
   mean more teachers for the same pot of money, producing lower salaries
   and lower professional status. That may explain the paradox that,
   after primary school, there seems little or no relationship between
   class size and educational achievement.

                                                                       AP
                                                                       AP

                                             Asian values or good policy?

   McKinsey argues that the best performing education systems
   nevertheless manage to attract the best. In Finland all new teachers
   must have a master's degree. South Korea recruits primary-school
   teachers from the top 5% of graduates, Singapore and Hong Kong from
   the top 30%.

   They do this in a surprising way. You might think that schools should
   offer as much money as possible, seek to attract a large pool of
   applicants into teacher training and then pick the best. Not so, says
   McKinsey. If money were so important, then countries with the highest
   teacher salaries--Germany, Spain and Switzerland--would presumably be
   among the best. They aren't. In practice, the top performers pay no
   more than average salaries.

   Nor do they try to encourage a big pool of trainees and select the
   most successful. Almost the opposite. Singapore screens candidates
   with a fine mesh before teacher training and accepts only the number
   for which there are places. Once in, candidates are employed by the
   education ministry and more or less guaranteed a job. Finland also
   limits the supply of teacher-training places to demand. In both
   countries, teaching is a high-status profession (because it is
   fiercely competitive) and there are generous funds for each trainee
   teacher (because there are few of them).

   South Korea shows how the two systems produce different results. Its
   primary-school teachers have to pass a four-year undergraduate degree
   from one of only a dozen universities. Getting in requires top grades;
   places are rationed to match vacancies. In contrast, secondary-school
   teachers can get a diploma from any one of 350 colleges, with laxer
   selection criteria. This has produced an enormous glut of newly
   qualified secondary-school teachers--11 for each job at last count. As
   a result, secondary-school teaching is the lower status job in South
   Korea; everyone wants to be a primary-school teacher. The lesson seems
   to be that teacher training needs to be hard to get into, not easy.

   Teaching the teachers

   Having got good people, there is a temptation to shove them into
   classrooms and let them get on with it. For understandable reasons,
   teachers rarely get much training in their own classrooms (in
   contrast, doctors do a lot of training in hospital wards). But
   successful countries can still do much to overcome the difficulty.

   Singapore provides teachers with 100 hours of training a year and
   appoints senior teachers to oversee professional development in each
   school. In Japan and Finland, groups of teachers visit each others'
   classrooms and plan lessons together. In Finland, they get an
   afternoon off a week for this. In Boston, which has one of America's
   most improved public-school systems, schedules are arranged so that
   those who teach the same subject have free classes together for common
   planning. This helps spread good ideas around. As one educator
   remarked, "when a brilliant American teacher retires, almost all of
   the lesson plans and practices that she has developed also retire.
   When a Japanese teacher retires, she leaves a legacy."

   Lastly, the most successful countries are distinctive not just in whom
   they employ so things go right but in what they do when things go
   wrong, as they always do. For the past few years, almost all countries
   have begun to focus more attention on testing, the commonest way to
   check if standards are falling. McKinsey's research is neutral on the
   usefulness of this, pointing out that while Boston tests every student
   every year, Finland has largely dispensed with national examinations.
   Similarly, schools in New Zealand and England and Wales are tested
   every three or four years and the results published, whereas
   top-of-the-class Finland has no formal review and keeps the results of
   informal audits confidential.

   But there is a pattern in what countries do once pupils and schools
   start to fail. The top performers intervene early and often. Finland
   has more special-education teachers devoted to laggards than anyone
   else--as many as one teacher in seven in some schools. In any given
   year, a third of pupils get one-on-one remedial lessons. Singapore
   provides extra classes for the bottom 20% of students and teachers are
   expected to stay behind--often for hours--after school to help
   students.

   None of this is rocket science. Yet it goes against some of the
   unspoken assumptions of education policy. Scratch a teacher or an
   administrator (or a parent), and you often hear that it is impossible
   to get the best teachers without paying big salaries; that teachers
   in, say, Singapore have high status because of Confucian values; or
   that Asian pupils are well behaved and attentive for cultural reasons.
   McKinsey's conclusions seem more optimistic: getting good teachers
   depends on how you select and train them; teaching can become a career
   choice for top graduates without paying a fortune; and that, with the
   right policies, schools and pupils are not doomed to lag behind.
   [gray.gif]

   *How the world's best performing schools systems come out on top.
   McKinsey & Co.

