
                                                                       AP

                                     AP

   An impressive bounty for the new skipper of a troubled ship

   WHEN sailors turn on their captain, it often ends badly--in shipwreck
   or retribution. But the World Bank, whose staff rose up against their
   leader in the spring, has just hauled in some treasure.

   On December 14th, after nine months' haggling, it convinced 45
   countries--including unlikely benefactors such as China, Egypt and
   Latvia--to give it over $25 billion, to be bestowed on the world's
   poorest states during the next three years.

   That is 42% more than the bank drummed up the last time round, and
   comes on top of $6.3 billion to compensate it for the loan repayments
   it lost as a result of debt relief. At a time when the IMF, a sister
   institution, faces big job cuts, this infusion of funds was a triumph
   for multilateralism. It was also a victory for the bank's new
   president, Robert Zoellick (pictured above), who replaced Paul
   Wolfowitz in July. A confident technocrat, he has reassured Europeans
   who were unnerved by his neoconservative predecessor's political
   baggage and lack of direction. Germany, one of the leaders of the
   spring putsch, stumped up $2.2 billion, and Britain, which pledged
   $4.3 billion, became the bank's biggest single donor.

   Mr Zoellick had raised the ante in this funding round by contributing
   $3.5 billion to the pot from other bits of the bank's empire. Rather
   than relending that money to middle-income countries or investing it
   in the private sector, Mr Zoellick chose to spend it in countries
   whose annual income per head is less than $1,065.

   In some ways, the bank's prospects may have benefited from tumult at
   the top. Europe's policymakers worked hard to oust Mr Wolfowitz. Why
   bother, if they were not ready to back his replacement?

   Still, Mr Zoellick's pitch in the beg-a-thon differed little from his
   predecessor's: the bank mobilises common funds for common aims, as Mr
   Wolfowitz put it. In a world of more than 280 donors (from the Desert
   Locust Control Organisation for Eastern Africa to the International
   Potato Centre), international aid is a fragmented business, putting it
   mildly. The bank says it can hold it all together.

   For example, on December 13th the bank approved a project to lay and
   repair rural roads and bridges in Afghanistan, which often succumb to
   snow, rain or landslides. Afghan reconstruction is supported by a
   multilateral fund, administered by the bank. All neat and tidy. But
   funds for road-building also arrive from the Europeans, the Japanese,
   the Americans, the British and even the UN's Counternarcotics Trust
   Fund. The road project's prospectus bemoans the "large numbers of
   donors and NGOs chasing projects and government attention".

   Too true. Tanzania got 542 donor visits in 2005; Vietnam had 791, more
   than two a day. By pouring money through a shared conduit like the
   bank, donors make fewer demands on weak local bureaucracies. The OECD,
   a rich-country club, says the bank is less of a nuisance than some
   donors: less prone to split aid into tiny projects, or to bypass a
   government's own budgetary systems.

   The bank calls itself a common "platform" from which others can
   operate. But such modesty conflicts, at times, with a need to find and
   advertise success stories. One such tale is a project in India's
   Karnataka state, which has helped farmers to make dams, collect rain
   and protect soil from monsoons. The bank says these efforts have
   raised crop yields by 24% and household incomes by two-thirds; they
   have also yielded some nice images of sapling mango trees and
   flowering jasmine.

   But the bank is still struggling to gauge the real impact of its work.
   It can say it built or repaired over 22,000 classrooms in the 12
   months to June, but it can't tell how much children are learning. So
   the bank wants to improve its own indicators: the Afghan project, for
   example, will judge its success by whether the price of commodities in
   village markets falls to within 15% of town prices. But the bank's
   recent woes have slowed the drive for closer self-scrutiny--a need
   that may well grow as it is called on to oversee projects that are
   supposed to conserve carbon (see [3]article).

   The bank is happy when cash flows smoothly from taxpayers, through its
   coffers, to the governments and projects it supports. But sometimes
   development is better served by restraint than by largesse. Free money
   can stifle a country's own tax-raising efforts--and private
   enterprise. It can also underwrite misgovernment and malfeasance. The
   bank's staff and shareholders balked when Mr Wolfowitz shifted course
   to focus more on corruption. After that experience, will their new
   helmsman ever dare to rock the boat?

