
                                                                  Eyevine

                                  Eyevine

   The business of marketing the Bible and the Koran says a lot about the
   state of modern Christianity and Islam 

   CHRISTIANS and Muslims have one striking thing in common: they are
   both "people of the book". And they both have an obligation to spread
   the Word--to get those Holy Books into the hands and hearts of as many
   people as they can. (The Jews, the third people of the book, do not
   feel quite the same obligation.)

   Spreading the Word is hard. The Bible is almost 800,000 words long and
   littered with tedious passages about begetting. The Koran is a mere
   four-fifths of the length of the New Testament; but some Westerners
   find it an even more difficult read. Edward Gibbon complained about
   its "endless incoherent rhapsody of fable and precept". Thomas Carlyle
   said that it was "as toilsome reading as I ever undertook; a
   wearisome, confused jumble, crude, incondite".

   Yet over 100m copies of the Bible are sold or given away every year.
   Annual Bible sales in America are worth between $425m and $650m;
   Gideon's International gives away a Bible every second. The Bible is
   available all or in part in 2,426 languages, covering 95% of the
   world's population.

   The Koran is not only the most widely read book in the Islamic world
   but also the most widely recited ("Koran" means "recitation"). There
   is no higher goal in Muslim life than to become a human repository of
   the Holy Book; there is no more common sound in the Muslim world than
   the sound of Koranic recitation.

   Reciting the Koran is the backbone of Muslim education. One of the
   most prized honorifics in Islamic society is "hafiz" or "one who has
   the entire scripture off by heart". Do so in Iran and you get an
   automatic university degree. The great recitors compete in tournaments
   that can attract audiences in the hundreds of thousands--the world
   cups of the Islamic world. The winners'CDs become instant bestsellers.

   The Bible and the Koran have both gone global. In 1900, 80% of the
   world's Christians lived in Europe and the United States. Today 60%
   live in the developing world. More Presbyterians go to church in Ghana
   than in Scotland. In 1900 Islam was concentrated in the Arab world and
   South-East Asia. Today, there may be as many practising Muslims in
   England as there are practising Anglicans; though in the 20th century,
   at least, Islam's expansion has mostly come about through population
   growth and migration, rather than conversion. Muslim "missionary"
   activity is aimed more at reinvigorating the faithful, and encouraging
   them to greater zealotry, than at winning new souls.

   This mountain of Holy Books is a giant refutation of the
   secularisation thesis--the idea that religion recedes as the world
   modernises. "The book lives on among its people," Constance Padwick, a
   scholar of the Koran, has written. "For them these are not mere
   letters or mere words. They are the twigs of the burning bush, aflame
   with God." The same can be said of the Bible.

                                                             Getty Images

                                Getty Images

   It also poses a couple of intriguing questions. Why are today's
   Christians and Muslims proving so successful at getting the Word out?
   And who is winning the battle of the books? Is either of the world's
   two great missionary religions gaining an edge when it comes to
   getting their Holy Books into people's hands and hearts?

   The straightforward answer to the first question is that Christians
   and Muslims are both proving remarkably adept at using the tools of
   modernity--globalisation, technology and growing wealth--to aid the
   distribution of their Holy Books. "Give me Scotland or I die," John
   Knox once cried. Today's faithful aim for the world.

   The combination of globalisation and rising wealth is proving to be a
   bonanza for both religions. The most prolific producer of Christian
   missionaries, on a per head basis, is now South Korea. The biggest
   Bible publishing houses are in Brazil and South Korea. An interlinked
   global network of 140 national or regional Bible Societies pools
   resources to reach its collective goal of putting a Bible in the hands
   of every man, woman and child on the planet. The American Bible
   Society, the biggest of the lot, has published more than 50m Bibles in
   atheist China.

   Saudi oil wealth is supercharging the distribution of the Koran. The
   kingdom gives away some 30m Korans a year, under the auspices of
   either the Muslim World League or individual billionaires,
   distributing them through a vast network of mosques, Islamic societies
   and even embassies. Go to [3]FreeKoran.com and you can have a free
   book in your hands in weeks.

   Saudi-funded dissemination of the Koran, along with literature
   promoting the stern Saudi understanding of Islam, may not have much
   direct effect on Christians, or the unchurched. But it does increase
   the relative weight, within Islam, of teachings which tend to sharpen
   the Christian-Muslim divide. For example, traditional Muslim teaching
   stresses those passages in the Koran which affirm the Christian Gospel
   and the Hebrew Torah as valid revelations of God and paths to
   salvation. But there is a harsher, Saudi-influenced view which insists
   that since Muhammad delivered the final revelation, Christianity and
   Judaism have lost their power to save.

   The Muslim diaspora and Muslim missionaries are bringing the faith to
   previously untouched areas. The Tablighi Jamaat ("the group that
   propagates the faith") is a global network of part-time preachers who
   dress like the Prophet, in a white robe and leather sandals, and
   travel in small groups to spread the Word. Their annual gatherings in
   India and Pakistan attract hundreds of thousands.

   Technology is proving to be a friend of the Holy Books. You can
   consult them on the internet. You can read them on your "Psalm pilot"
   or mobile phone. You can listen to them on MP3 players or iPods
   ("podcasting" has given rise to "Godcasting"). Want to "plug into God
   without unplugging from life"? Then simply buy a Go Bible MP3 player.
   Want to memorise the Koran? Then buy an MP3 player that displays the
   words as you listen. Want to network with like-minded people? Then the
   eBible allows you to discuss biblical passages with virtual friends.

   Several television channels and radio stations do nothing but
   broadcast the Koran. At the other end of the technological spectrum,
   the American Bible Society produces an audio device, powered by a
   battery or hand crank and no bigger than a couple of cigar boxes, that
   can broadcast the Bible to a crowd of a hundred.

                                                             Getty Images

                                Getty Images

                            A well-thumbed Book

   There is a difference, however, between getting and understanding a
   Holy Book. Here both Christianity and Islam suffer from serious
   problems. Americans buy more than 20m new Bibles every year to add to
   the four that the average American has at home. Yet the state of
   American biblical knowledge is abysmal. A Gallup survey found that
   less than half of Americans can name the first book of the Bible
   (Genesis), only a third know who delivered the Sermon on the Mount
   (Billy Graham is a popular answer) and a quarter do not know what is
   celebrated at Easter (the resurrection, the foundational event of
   Christianity). Sixty per cent cannot name half the ten commandments;
   12% think Noah was married to Joan of Arc. George Gallup, a leading
   Evangelical as well as a premier pollster, describes America as "a
   nation of biblical illiterates".

   Muslims greatly prefer to read the Koran in the original Arabic. Yet
   the archaic language and high-flown verse, while inspiring, can also
   be difficult to understand even for educated Arabic speakers. And only
   20% of Muslims speak Arabic as their first language. Illiteracy rates
   are high across the Muslim world. Many students of the Holy Book do
   not understand much of what they are memorising.

   This needs to be kept in mind when considering who is winning the
   battle of the books. For some, the question is an abomination. Can't
   both sides win by converting the heathen? And aren't Christianity and
   Islam fellow Abrahamic faiths--different versions of the Truth? Others
   worry that the question is impossible to answer, since there are no
   systematic figures on the distribution of the Koran, and the battle's
   front-line cuts through some of the darkest and most dangerous places
   on the planet. Muslims would argue that their struggle was aimed more
   at galvanising their own flock than at converting unbelievers. But
   Islam's relative introversion doesn't make for peaceful coexistence.
   In many parts of the world, Islamic authorities have reacted furiously
   to attempts by Christians to entice Muslims to "apostasise" or
   renounce their faith; in traditional Islamic law, the penalty for
   apostasy is death; and encouraging believers to apostasise is also
   treated as a crime.

   In many parts of the world, battle seems to be in progress. The Saudis
   will not allow the Bible to be distributed on their soil. Many
   Evangelical Christians are fixated on what they call the 10/40
   window--the vast swathe of the Islamic world in Africa and Asia that
   lies between latitudes 10 and 40 north of the equator. The
   Southwestern Baptist Theological Seminary in Texas has even created a
   masters degree to train missionaries in the art of converting Muslims.
   Some Evangelicals produce counterfeit Korans that are designed to
   plant doubt in Muslim minds.

   And the battle of the books is certainly at the heart of the battle
   between the two religions. People who get hold of Bibles or Korans may
   not read them or understand them. Unless they are introduced to the
   books they will certainly remain heathens. Even an imperfect report on
   the state of the battle tells us a lot about the world's two great
   missionary religions.

   The Christians entered the 21st century with a big head start. There
   are 2 billion of them in the world compared with 1.5 billion Muslims.
   But Islam had a better 20th century than Christianity. The world's
   Muslim population grew from 200m in 1900 to its current levels.
   Christianity has shrivelled in Christendom's European heart. Islam is
   resurgent across the Arab world. Many Christian scholars predict that
   Islam will overtake Christianity as the world's largest religion by
   2050.

   More recently, though, Muslims complain that the "war on terror" is
   making it much more difficult to spread the Koran. Contributions to
   Muslim charities have fallen since September 11th 2001. Several
   charities have had their funding disrupted. Missionary organisations
   such as the Tablighi Jamaat are under investigation by Western
   intelligence services, on the grounds that they may be way-stations to
   jihadism. And Muslims confront much bigger long-term problems in the
   battle of the books.

   The first is Christianity's superior marketing skills. Its religious
   publishing houses are big businesses. Thomas Nelson, which was once
   owned by a former door-to-door Bible salesman, was bought in 2005 for
   $473m. And secular publishing houses have also got religion:
   HarperCollins bought Zondervan, a religious book publisher, in the
   late 1980s, and now most mainstream publishers are trying to produce
   their own Bibles. As a result, all the tricks of the publisher's trade
   are being applied to the Bible.

   Consider product proliferation. Thomas Nelson publishes 60 different
   editions of the Bible every year. The Good Book now comes in all
   colours, including those of your college. There are Bibles for every
   sort of person, from "seekers" to cowboys, from brides to barmen.
   There is a waterproof outdoor Bible and a camouflage Bible for use in
   war zones. The "100 minute Bible" summarises the Good Book for the
   time-starved.

   Consider user-friendliness. There are prayer books in everyday
   vernacular or even street slang ("And even though I walk through/The
   Hood of death/I don't back down/for you have my back"). Or consider
   innovation. In 2003 Thomas Nelson dreamt up the idea of
   Bible-zines--crosses between Bibles and teenage magazines. The pioneer
   was Revolve, which intercuts the New Testament with beauty tips and
   relationship advice ("are you dating a Godly guy?"). This was quickly
   followed by Refuel, for boys, and Blossom and Explore, for tweens.

                                                  [spacer.gif] [gray.gif]
                                                             [spacer.gif]
          The world's richest and most powerful country contains some 80m
                                                             Evangelicals
                                                             [spacer.gif]
                                                               [gray.gif]

   There are toddler-friendly versions of the most famous Bible stories.
   The "Boy's Bible" promises "gross and gory Bible stuff". The "Picture
   Bible" looks like a super-hero comic. "God's Little Princess
   Devotional Bible" is pink and sparkly.

   There are about 900 English translations of the Bible, ranging from
   the grandiloquent to the colloquial. There are translations into
   languages, such as Inupiat and Gullah, that are spoken by only
   handfuls of people. Bob Hudson, of the American Bible Society, wants
   everybody on the planet to be able to claim that "God speaks my
   language". A couple of eccentric geeks have even translated the Bible
   into Klingon, a language spoken only by scrofulous space aliens on
   "Star Trek".

   Publishers are producing sophisticated dramatisations of the Bible
   with famous actors and state-of-the-art sound effects. Zondervan's
   "The Bible Experience" features every black actor in Hollywood from
   Denzel Washington to Samuel L. Jackson. Other outfits are making films
   that dramatise Bible stories as faithfully as possible.

   And then there are the spin-offs. A "fully posable" Jesus doll recites
   famous passages of the Good Book. There are Bible quiz books, stuffed
   with crosswords and other word puzzles, and Bible bingo games. There
   are Bible colouring books, sticker books and floor puzzles. There is
   even a Bible-based juke box that plays your favourite biblical
   passages.

   Muslims have also gone into the Holy Book business, but nowhere near
   as enthusiastically as Christians. This is partly because their
   commercial publishing houses are smaller and less sophisticated, but
   also because Muslims believe that the Koran is the literal word of
   God--dictated to Muhammad (who was himself illiterate) by the Angel
   Gabriel and then written down by Muhammad's followers. "The Koran does
   not document what is other than itself," one scholar notes. "It is not
   about the truth. It is the truth."

                                                            Thomas Nelson
                                                            Thomas Nelson

   This makes Muslims uncomfortable with translations. The Holy Book says
   sternly that "we have sent no messenger save with the tongue of his
   people." Today most Muslims tolerate translations--there are now more
   than 20 English translations--but do so reluctantly. Most translations
   are as literal as possible. Pious Muslims are expected to learn God's
   language.

   The second advantage the Christians have is America. The world's
   richest and most powerful country contains some 80m Evangelicals. It
   supports more missionaries, more broadcasting organisations and more
   global publishers than any other country. Despite some countries' oil
   wealth, the Koran's heartland is relatively poor. The Arab world has
   one of the highest illiteracy rates in the world, with a fifth of men
   and two-fifths of women unable to read. It also has one of the lowest
   rates of internet usage.

   The third big advantage is the West's belief in religious
   freedom--guaranteed in America by the constitution, and in Europe by
   an aversion to religious persecution caused by centuries of it. The
   heartland of Islam, by contrast, is theocratic. The Saudi Ministry of
   Islamic Affairs, Endowment, Call and Guidance employs 120,000 people,
   including 72,000 imams. Saudi Arabia bans non-Islamic worship and
   regards attempts to convert Muslims to another faith as a criminal
   offence. Pakistan has witnessed the attacks on Christian missionaries.
   Sudan punishes "religious deviation" with imprisonment.

   Christian Evangelists complain that this creates an uneven playing
   field: Muslims can build giant mosques in "Christian lands" while
   Christians are barred from distributing Bibles in Saudi Arabia and
   Iran. But uneven playing fields tend to weaken the home players. Open
   competition is a boon to religion: American Evangelism has flourished
   precisely because America has no official church. And theocracy is
   ultimately a source of sloth and conservatism. "The Book and the
   Koran", by Muhammad Shahrur, which tried to reinterpret the Koran for
   modern readers, was widely banned in the Islamic world, despite its
   pious tone and huge popularity.

   This state-of-the-battle report comes with a health warning.
   Predicting the fate of religions is unwise, for they can burn or
   gutter in unpredictable ways. But two things are certain in the battle
   of the books. The first is that the urge to spread the Word will spark
   some of the fiercest conflicts of the 21st century. The area that is
   being most heavily fought over--sub-Saharan Africa--is a tinder box of
   failed states and ethnic animosities. The second is that the Bible and
   the Koran will continue to exercise a dramatic influence over human
   events, for both good and ill. The twigs of the burning bush are still
   aflame with the fire of God.

