
   A good graphic can tell a story, bring a lump to the throat, even
   change policies. Here are three of history's best

   IT WAS at a dinner party in 1856 that Florence Nightingale met William
   Farr. The Lady of the Lamp was already famous for nursing British
   soldiers wounded in the Crimea; Farr, the Compiler of Abstracts in the
   General Registry Office, was widely recognised as an innovative
   statistician. Both cared deeply about improving the world through
   sanitation; both understood the importance of meticulous records in
   providing the evidence needed to bring about change.

                                                             Graphic News

                                Graphic News

   Farr was the first to compile "mortality tables", listing causes of
   death in the general population; Nightingale compared his numbers with
   her own on the deaths of soldiers to great effect. By showing that
   even in peacetime a soldier faced twice the risk of dying in a given
   year as a civilian, she campaigned successfully for better conditions
   in barracks. The pair were instrumental in setting up a royal
   commission of inquiry into sanitary conditions during the Crimean war.

   Although remembered as the mother of modern nursing, Nightingale was
   an accomplished statistician too. She was particularly innovative in
   presenting data visually. The example above, of a type now known as
   "Nightingale's Rose" or "Nightingale's Coxcomb", comes from her
   monograph, "Notes on matters affecting the health, efficiency and
   hospital administration of the British army" published in 1858. In the
   same year she became the first female fellow of the Statistical
   Society of London (now Royal Statistical Society).

   The chart displays the causes of the deaths of soldiers during the
   Crimean war, divided into three categories: "Preventible or Mitigable
   Zymotic Diseases" (infectious diseases, including cholera and
   dysentery, coloured in blue), "wounds" (red) and "all other causes"
   (black). As with today's pie charts, the area of each wedge is
   proportional to the figure it stands for, but it is the radius of each
   slice (the distance from the common centre to the outer edge) rather
   than the angle that is altered to achieve this. Her principal
   message--that even during periods of heavy fighting, such as November
   1854, far more soldiers died from infection than from wounds--can be
   seen at a glance. She sent the chart to the War Office; and it is a
   fair assumption that it contributed to the improvements in military
   hospitals that she brought about.

   Nightingale's chart is a beautiful and persuasive call to action, but
   it is not perfect. The red, black and blue wedges are all measured
   from the centre, so some areas mask parts of others. The numbers of
   deaths from the various causes are not stated--although, to be fair,
   it was their relative size that Nightingale wished to show.

                                                             Graphic News

                                Graphic News

   The chart to the left also tells the story of a war: Napoleon's
   Russian campaign of 1812. It was drawn half a century afterwards by
   Charles Joseph Minard, a French civil engineer who worked on dams,
   canals and bridges. He was 80 years old and long retired when, in
   1861, he called on the innovative techniques he had invented for the
   purpose of displaying flows of people, in order to tell the tragic
   tale in a single image. Edward Tufte, whose book, "The Visual Display
   of Quantitative Information" is a bible to statisticians, calls it
   "the best statistical graphic ever drawn".

   Minard's chart shows six types of information: geography, time,
   temperature, the course and direction of the army's movement, and the
   number of troops remaining. The widths of the gold (outward) and black
   (returning) paths represent the size of the force, one millimetre to
   10,000 men. Geographical features and major battles are marked and
   named, and plummeting temperatures on the return journey are shown
   along the bottom.

   The chart tells the dreadful story with painful clarity: in 1812, the
   Grand Army set out from Poland with a force of 422,000; only 100,000
   reached Moscow; and only 10,000 returned. The detail and
   understatement with which such horrifying loss is represented combine
   to bring a lump to the throat. As men tried, and mostly failed, to
   cross the Bérézina river under heavy attack, the width of the black
   line halves: another 20,000 or so gone. The French now use the
   expression "C'est la Bérézina" to describe a total disaster.

   In 1871, the year after Minard died, his obituarist cited particularly
   his graphical innovations: "For the dry and complicated columns of
   statistical data, of which the analysis and the discussion always
   require a great sustained mental effort, he had substituted images
   mathematically proportioned, that the first glance takes in and knows
   without fatigue, and which manifest immediately the natural
   consequences or the comparisons unforeseen." The chart shown here is
   singled out for special mention: it "inspires bitter reflections on
   the cost to humanity of the madnesses of conquerors and the merciless
   thirst of military glory".

                                                             Graphic News

                                Graphic News

   The chart to the left is the earliest of our three. It was published
   in 1821 by William Playfair, a Scottish engineer, political economist
   and scoundrel: he was convicted of libel in England and swindling in
   France. Alongside these many and varied skills he was also an engraver
   (he produced some of James Watt's engineering drawings), which
   explains this image's handsomeness, with its delicate shading and
   ornate attribution.

   Playfair liked controversial topics. He drew a chart comparing tax
   levels in various countries in order to show that Britain's was too
   high. He was the first to show imports and exports on one chart,
   shading the area between the two to indicate the balance of trade and
   explaining that the intersection of the lines showed a shift in favour
   of one country or the other.

   This chart, his most famous, shows the "weekly wages of a good
   mechanic" and the "price of a quarter of wheat", with the reigns of
   monarchs displayed along the top. It is a little difficult to see the
   point Playfair wished to make: "that never at any former period was
   wheat so cheap, in proportion to mechanical labour as it is at the
   present time". Presumably he was not familiar with the idea of
   combining two variables--prices and wages--to make a
   third--affordability. Still, he should not be overly criticised for
   this. For a start, his conclusion was correct. Statisticians have used
   his data to plot wages divided by prices (showing how much wheat a
   week's wages would buy) against time, and the point becomes clear--as,
   incidentally, does a more subtle one: the increase in buying power was
   slowing down.

   And Playfair was already making a leap of abstraction that few of his
   contemporaries could follow. Using the horizontal and vertical axes to
   represent time and money was such a novelty that he had to explain it
   painstakingly in accompanying text. "This method has struck several
   persons as being fallacious", he wrote, "because geometrical
   measurement has not any relation to money or to time; yet here it is
   made to represent both."

   He was the first in a series of economists, statisticians and social
   reformers who wanted to use data not only to inform but also to
   persuade and even campaign--and who understood that when the eye
   comprehends, the heart often follows. Nightingale hoped her charts
   would liven up her publications; the queen, she thought, might look at
   the pictures, even if she did not read the words.

   Not everyone thought it was right to include such fripperies in a
   sober publication. "We do not want impressions, we want facts," Farr
   wrote to her in 1861. "You complain that your report would be dry. The
   dryer the better. Statistics should be the dryest of all reading."
   Fortunately, she ignored him.

