
   Good news, but no certainty of salvation, for forests and their
   friends


   IF THE Bali conference on climate change brought good news to anyone,
   it must surely be the inhabitants of the rainforests and others
   committed to preserving those trees. But their reactions have been
   mixed, ranging from delight to scepticism.

   For rainforest campaigners, the Bali statement's allusion to an urgent
   need for "meaningful action to reduce emissions from deforestation and
   forest degradation" was a sweet victory, even if the only concrete
   step in that direction was a "work programme" to test various
   approaches.

   Under the current regime (expiring in 2012), financial rewards for
   storing carbon through trees were attached only to reforestation or
   planting new forests. That restriction became hard to justify as
   evidence mounted that the destruction of tropical forests caused as
   much as 20% of heat-trapping greenhouse emissions.

   But including "avoided deforestation" in a post-2012 strategy will
   transform the politics of climate change, globally and inside some
   countries. For example, with deforestation taken into account,
   Indonesia and Brazil soar up the table to become the world's third-
   and fourth-largest emitters.

   When the Kyoto protocol was negotiated, deforestation was excluded
   partly on scientific grounds; people couldn't agree on its precise
   effects, or on how to measure the carbon loss. Those problems have now
   been laid to rest by better technology.

   But other things have not been settled. Brazil's leaders want a system
   to reward whole countries for bringing their deforestation rates down
   to pre-1990 levels and keeping them there. It so happens that Brazil
   may be the only nation that qualifies. Most other people (including
   the governor of Brazil's Amazonas state and its indigenous leaders)
   back a more local and market-based approach.

   In any case, systems that rely on the honesty and power of governments
   will run into problems. Zealous greens are wary of carbon-trading on
   the moral ground that it lets the rich off the hook; in fact,
   investors in carbon markets will be the first to shun conservation
   projects that are manifestly failing because of bad government or
   corruption.

   Take Indonesia, where 80% of deforestation is of dubious legality.
   Weak law enforcement is the main problem. Contradictory
   policies--resulting, recently, in a spat between police and the
   forestry ministry in Sumatra--are another. A decade ago, Indonesia's
   illegal logging mainly served the pulp and timber industries. Now palm
   oil, an "ecological" product, is the big driving force. Recent
   research suggests that for every dollar invested in oil-palm
   plantations, $20 is recouped in a few years, even without the one-off
   gain from selling timber. Even if palm-oil prices slip downwards,
   forest-conservation plans would need to be very robust to compete.

   And it is still unclear who would get the money for reducing
   deforestation. A bad taste was left by the World Bank's failure to
   consult the UN Permanent Forum on Indigenous Issues before launching a
   "carbon partnership facility" designed to keep forests intact--an
   error, the bank insists, that is now being rectified.

   The decisions taken at Bali call for a couple more years of trial and
   error before finding the best way to keep trees standing. But the
   chainsaws won't stand still.

