
                                                                      AFP

                                    AFP

   The poor world is getting the rich world's diseases

   IN 1619 an English captain sailing past Cape Cod reported that the
   Massachusetts shore was "utterly void". The Indians "died in heapes as
   they lay in their houses" confirmed an English merchant. By killing
   much of the population of the Wampanoag confederacy, the epidemic that
   raged from 1616-19 made possible the first permanent European
   settlement in north America, that of the Pilgrim Fathers in 1620. The
   Indians had caught the illness, thought to have been viral hepatitis,
   from prior contact with Europeans, probably captured French sailors.

   Europeans have been exporting their maladies throughout history. They
   seem to be doing it again, but in a new way. In the past, the problem
   was infection. Now, illnesses associated with Western living standards
   are the fastest growing killers in poor and middle-income countries.
   Chronic disease has become the poor world's greatest health problem.

   For many in the West, diseases are a bit like birds: everyone gets
   them but poor countries have more exotic species. Rich-country
   maladies are things like heart disease, cancer and diabetes: "chronic"
   conditions often resulting from diet or physical inactivity.
   Developing countries suffer more lurid and acute infections: malaria,
   tuberculosis, measles, cholera. HIV/AIDS is unusual in that it affects
   rich and poor alike. But otherwise, poor countries are presumed to
   have their own health problems. The sixth of the United Nations'
   millennium development goals (a sort of ten commandments of poverty
   reduction adopted in 2000) is concerned with infections only--the
   ailments of poverty. The progress report issued last month half way
   through the millennium programme's 15-year course tracks HIV/AIDS,
   malaria and tuberculosis. Combating chronic disease is not part of
   what the UN calls its "universal framework for development".

   Yet the distinction between illnesses of affluence and illnesses of
   poverty is misleading as a description of the world and doubtful as a
   guide to policy. Heart disease--supposedly an illness of affluence--is
   by far and away the biggest cause of global mortality. It was
   responsible for 17.5m deaths worldwide in 2005. Next comes cancer,
   another non-infectious sickness, which caused more deaths than
   HIV/AIDS, tuberculosis and malaria put together (see chart 1). Chronic
   conditions such as heart disease took the lives of 35m people in 2005,
   according to the World Health Organisation (WHO)--twice as many as all
   infectious diseases.

   If you look at lower-middle income countries, such as China, or
   upper-middle income ones, like Argentina, you find that what kills
   people there is the same as in the West (see chart 2). Four-fifths of
   all deaths in China are from chronic sicknesses. That is also true of
   countries as varied as Egypt, Jamaica and Sri Lanka.

   The main difference between these countries and rich ones is that
   chronic illnesses are more deadly there. Five times as many people die
   of heart disease in Brazil as in Britain, though Brazil is not five
   times as populous. Rich countries have become better at dealing with
   chronic conditions: death rates from heart disease among men over 30
   have fallen by more than half in the past generation, from 600-800 per
   100,000 in 1970 to 200-300 per 100,000 now.

   This has not happened in middle-income countries. In 1980 the death
   rate for Brazilian men was below the rich-country average (300
   compared with 500-600). Its death rate has not changed--and is now
   higher than all but a few rich countries. Russia is worse off. In 1980
   its death rate was 750 per 100,000. Now it is 900, about four times as
   high as most rich countries.

   It may not seem surprising that upper-middle income places such as
   Russia suffer from "Western" ailments. But chronic diseases are mass
   killers in the poorest nations, too. Indeed, the only unusual thing
   about these countries is that they suffer from infections as well as
   chronic disease: a double burden. Chronic diseases were responsible
   for over 12m deaths in countries with annual incomes below $750 a head
   in 2005--almost as many as were caused by communicable ones. Africa is
   the only continent where infectious illnesses cause more deaths than
   the non-communicable kinds.

   Chronic diseases are becoming deadlier and more burdensome to the
   poor. By 2015, says the World Bank, these ailments will be the leading
   cause of death in low-income countries. They already account for
   almost half of all illnesses there and impose substantial economic
   costs.

   People in poor countries get chronic diseases younger than in the
   West. There, chronic conditions bear heavily upon the old. Not so in
   poor and middle-income nations. Death rates for those between 30 and
   69 years of age in India, Russia and Brazil are two or three times
   higher than in Canada and Britain. Almost half of deaths from chronic
   problems in developing countries occur in people below 70.

   As a result, the poor suffer from chronic illnesses longer and are
   more likely to die of them. The death rate from chronic disease in
   poor countries is obviously higher than in rich countries; more
   surprisingly, it is often higher than the death rate from infections.
   India, Pakistan, Nigeria and Tanzania all have roughly the same death
   rate for cardiovascular disease: 400 per 100,000. That is at least
   twice as high as the Western norm and, at least in India and Pakistan,
   more than four times the average death rate from infections (in
   Nigeria and Tanzania, HIV/AIDS, malaria and tuberculosis are still
   deadlier).

   Chronic disease bears down especially hard on working adults, imposing
   a heavy economic burden. Families in poor countries are much more
   likely than in the West to spend their savings looking after a
   chronically ill relative, or to pull children out of school to act as
   nursemaids.

   In short, developing countries suffer more from "rich world maladies"
   than the rich world itself. Overall in 2005, only a fifth of deaths
   attributable to "illnesses of affluence" (chronic conditions) actually
   took place in the most affluent nations. Three-quarters happened in
   poor or lower-middle-income ones.

   Death eaters

   Why are poor countries so vulnerable to the diseases of the rich? And
   why does public attention and aid money ignore them and focus on
   infections?

   The simplest explanation for chronic diseases' increasing importance
   is that people in poor countries now live long enough to suffer them.
   Thanks to better sanitation, more food and improved public health,
   average life expectancy in low and middle-income countries has risen
   from 50 in 1965 to 65 in 2005. The increase in the poorest countries
   was proportionately greater: from 47 to 63. There are now more old
   people around to be vulnerable to chronic maladies.

   At the same time, because of increased health spending and safer
   water, infectious diseases have declined relative to chronic ones.
   International financing for malaria control has increased more than
   tenfold in the past decade. The Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation,
   with its $33 billion endowment, concentrates largely on infections. As
   a result, the incidence of tuberculosis, measured by the number of new
   cases per 100,000, has fallen slightly. In Africa fatal malaria cases
   among children under five (the main victims) fell between 1960 and
   1995, though the decline has since levelled off. The WHO reckons that
   deaths from infections will decline by 3% over the next ten years. So
   more people in poor places will survive infections in their dangerous
   childhoods to reach an age when they are susceptible to heart attacks
   and cancer.

   Since chronic disease among the poor is not the preserve of old age,
   another part of the explanation for its increasing importance must lie
   in the harmful things middle-aged folk do. Of these, smoking and
   unhealthy eating are most important.

   Around 300m Chinese men smoke. In China, Egypt, Indonesia and Russia,
   people spend 5-6% of their household income on cigarettes--far more
   than the share in rich countries. Smoking and its associated ailments
   are still rising in poor countries, even while they fall in rich ones.

   Middle-income countries are also experiencing extraordinary levels of
   obesity. According to one study, half of all households in Brazil
   contain at least one obese person; the share is three-quarters in
   Russia. According to another, Mexico is the second fattest nation
   among the 30 (mostly rich) countries of the Organisation for Economic
   Co-operation and Development, after America. It has the highest rate
   of diabetes among large countries, with 6.5m diabetics in a population
   of 100m. Not coincidentally, Mexicans are among the biggest swiggers
   of fizzy drinks in the world. Coke and tacos, anyone?

   Obesity affects rich countries, of course: it is a symptom of
   affluence and urbanisation. But it is occurring much earlier than
   anyone had expected in middle-income places. Obesity among children
   there used to be unheard of. Last year China's vice-minister for
   health, Wang Longde, said more than a fifth of Chinese children
   between seven and 17 who live in cities are overweight--a proportion
   that presumably reflects not only the wealth of China's urban elite
   but the amount of money they lavish on their "little emperors" (the
   single children they are limited to by China's one-child policy).

   Yet despite all the evidence that chronic disease is the world's
   biggest health problem, most poor countries focus on infectious
   disease and their health policies are usually based on the idea that
   infections should be controlled before chronic conditions. These
   choices no doubt partly reflect bureaucratic inertia at health
   ministries and investment in fighting infections by medical charities
   and drugs firms.

   Not just statistics

   It is true that there are better reasons why poor countries might want
   to concentrate on infections despite the growth of chronic disease.
   Infectious illnesses are usually simpler to deal with than chronic
   ones, requiring inoculation campaigns rather than long-term care,
   changes of lifestyle and the uphill work of public education.
   Moreover, if you inoculate a child against malaria, you considerably
   reduce his or her chances of dying from that disease, since most
   deaths from malaria occur among children under ten. If you lower
   someone's risk of getting a heart condition at 50, you might well find
   they get it at 60. The disease can only be managed.

   Still, it can be managed better: the contrast between death rates from
   heart attacks (falling in the West, rising elsewhere) shows that.
   Stalin said a single death is a tragedy, a million deaths, a
   statistic. But millions of avoidable deaths are millions of tragedies.
   Chronic disease is already the biggest problem for poor and
   middle-income countries. To concentrate so much on infections is to
   add to the health burden of the next generation in what are already
   the world's poorest, unhealthiest places.

