
   Judges and parliamentarians are restraining the zeal of governments
   who want a free hand to fight terror. The third in our series

                                                                  Reuters
                                                                  Reuters

                                    Guantánamo: where rights are shackled

   HAULED before a military tribunal at the American naval base in
   Guantánamo Bay, the detainee, picked up in Afghanistan, asked why he
   was being held. For associating with a member of al-Qaeda, he was
   told. Give me his name, the detainee demanded. The tribunal's
   president said he didn't know it. Nor did any of the tribunal's other
   members. "How can I respond to this?" the detainee cried before being
   taken back to his cell to continue his detention, perhaps for the rest
   of his life.

   This Kafkaesque story was related this summer by Arlen Specter, the
   ranking Republican on the Senate Judiciary Committee, in support of a
   bill he and Patrick Leahy, the committee's Democratic chairman, were
   co-sponsoring to restore habeas corpus rights to Guantánamo's
   detainees. Most have been held for nearly six years without charge,
   without access to a lawyer or any indication of when, if ever, they
   might be released. The Pentagon has said they could be held for the
   duration of the (open-ended) "global war on terror".

   Guantánamo has become a byword for the Bush administration's gung-ho
   reaction to the terror attacks of September 2001. In Britain, too, the
   government has sought new powers to tackle Islamist terrorism, even if
   these seemed to offend ancient liberties. But the story is not over
   yet. It could turn into a tale not of liberties being frayed, but of
   democracy's underlying strength. For, in both America and Britain, the
   doctrine of the balance of powers has passed a test. The executive
   branch made a grab for more authority; but courts and legislators have
   tried hard to push back.

   Freedom from arbitrary arrest and detention, coupled with the right to
   challenge it in an independent court--known as habeas corpus in
   common-law countries like Britain and America--are among the civilised
   world's most sacred and ancient liberties, going back to medieval
   times. But these days, there is more talk of pre-emption and
   "preventive detention", even in democracies. "You can't allow somebody
   to commit the crime before you detain them," said Condoleezza Rice,
   the secretary of state, when asked about America's secret "renditions"
   programme for suspected terrorists.

   What the public safety requires

   Under the American constitution, habeas corpus may not be suspended
   except when "in cases of rebellion or invasion, the public safety may
   require it". And only very rarely has it been suspended. Abraham
   Lincoln did so during the civil war, but was rebuked by the courts.
   And the internment of 120,000 people of Japanese descent, two-thirds
   of them American citizens, in the second world war, was lawful but is
   now viewed as a shameful misdeed.

   Britain likewise suspended habeas corpus in the second world war to
   allow it to detain around 1,000 suspected fascists. All were released
   after three years. During the "troubles" in Northern Ireland in the
   early 1970s, nearly 2,000 suspected extremists were interned. But the
   practice was scrapped in 1975, as it was clearly fuelling support for
   terrorism--just as Guantánamo is doing now.

   George Bush chose the American naval base in Cuba as the detention
   centre for those picked up in his war on terror because officials
   believed--falsely as it turned out--Guantánamo was beyond the reach of
   domestic and international law. If the detainees had been held on
   American soil, they could have claimed the same rights as ordinary
   American citizens, including a right to due process, to apply for
   asylum and to sue the American government for any alleged wrongs.

   From the outset, the 775 or so men and boys (some as young as 13) sent
   by Mr Bush to Guantánamo were branded as guilty. Donald Rumsfeld, the
   former defence secretary, described them as "hard-core, well-trained
   terrorists" who, if released, would simply "return to the fight and
   continue to kill innocent men, women and children". The Pentagon says
   that all were "caught in the battlefield". But many were given to the
   Americans by Afghan bounty-seekers; others were seized as far away as
   Bosnia and Zambia.

   Mr Bush claims that, under international law, parties to an armed
   conflict may hold enemy combatants "for the duration of active
   hostilities". This is correct. Nor is "unlawful enemy combatant" a
   term he invented. In the Geneva Conventions, it describes a foe who is
   not a member of official armed forces or an organised resistance
   movement, does not carry arms openly, wears no uniform or other
   distinctive sign, and refuses to heed the laws of war. As such, he
   fails to qualify for the rights of a prisoner of war. But, contrary to
   what the administration first claimed, he is entitled to some
   protections, including humane treatment and, if charged, to a fair
   trial by a "regularly constituted court".

   But is America's war on terror a real war in the legal sense? If not,
   then the detainees should be treated as ordinary criminal suspects.
   This is the path that most European countries have chosen. Even if it
   could be deemed a real war, it is clearly unlike an ordinary state
   conflict: it has neither a definable end nor even an identifiable
   enemy with whom to sue for peace. It could last for decades.

   Meanwhile, dozens, perhaps hundreds, of detainees are apparently to be
   left to rot in their cages--if not in Guantánamo, which Mr Bush says
   he wants to close--then somewhere else. America has also engaged in
   so-called "extraordinary rendition"--the abduction of suspected
   terrorists to face not justice, but harsh interrogation, perhaps
   torture, in a third country. Up to 100 nameless "high-value" suspects
   are believed to have been seized by CIA agents and then transferred to
   secret jails, some never to resurface. Around 15 have recently been
   transferred to Guantánamo, where they may or may not face trial. But
   most of the 330-odd detainees remaining at the camp may never be
   charged or tried. The Pentagon says it hopes eventually to put up to
   80 detainees on trial for war crimes by special military commissions.
   Even if acquitted, they may still be held as enemy combatants for the
   rest of the "war".

   In Britain, all renditions have been outlawed since a Court of Appeal
   ruling in 1999 overturned the conviction of an Irish Republican, Peter
   Mullen, who had been spirited back to Britain from Zimbabwe. His
   abduction was described by the court as a "blatant and extremely
   serious failure to adhere to the rule of law".

   Britain has eroded liberties in other ways. Immediately after the
   September 11th attacks, the government brought in a law allowing it to
   hold indefinitely and without charge any foreigner deemed a national
   security risk--on the simple say-so of the home secretary. To do this,
   it had to opt out of parts of the European Convention on Human Rights,
   as is permitted "in time of war or other public emergency threatening
   the life of the nation". None of the 45 other signatories has deemed
   such a step necessary.

   Belmarsh prison in London, where most terror suspects were held, was
   dubbed "Britain's Guantánamo"--a bit unfairly. Britain never claimed
   to be in the midst of a war or to be holding "unlawful enemy
   combatants" with no legal rights. Its foreign detainees, totalling no
   more than 18, always had access to a lawyer and could challenge their
   detention before an independent tribunal, though they were not allowed
   to see classified evidence against them. The government said they were
   not being held indefinitely, just awaiting deportation. But as they
   could not be sent to their own countries (because they might be
   tortured), and no other state wanted them, the effect was the same.

   The law lords say no

   In December 2004 the House of Lords, Britain's highest court, judged
   this system to be incompatible with the European Convention. For Lord
   Scott, one of the law lords involved, indefinite detention on
   undisclosed grounds was "the stuff of nightmares", reminiscent of a
   Stalinist regime. The law was duly scrapped. But it was replaced by
   new powers allowing the home secretary (not a judge) to impose an
   indefinitely renewable "control order"--including electronic tagging,
   a ban on phone and internet use, and strict curfews amounting at times
   to virtual house arrest--on any suspected terrorist, British or
   foreign.

   The new system seems as riddled with problems as the old, and almost
   as unfair. In its latest report on control orders, in September, the
   Home Office said three of the 14 people subject to the regime had
   absconded. Several people have had their orders quashed by judges who
   again found the measures incompatible with the European Convention.
   The government has appealed to the House of Lords, which is expected
   to pronounce later this month.

   In the final months of Tony Blair's government, ministers said they
   were prepared to "take the nuclear option" and opt out of the
   convention again if the law lords' ruling went against them. That
   threat has not been repeated by the new prime minister, Gordon Brown.
   But he may yet try similar moves. He has already announced plans for a
   new anti-terrorist law--Britain's fifth since 2000. Among his
   proposals is an extension of the maximum time a suspected terrorist
   can be held without charge from 28 days, already the longest in the
   West, to 56 days. Most democracies allow no more than three days.
   France permits four; Greece six.

   But no leader of a Western democracy has obtained a completely free
   hand in detaining people. America has seen a tug of war between the
   government and the courts, with many rounds. In June 2004, the Supreme
   Court ruled that habeas corpus remained available to everyone detained
   on American soil, unless explicitly suspended. The case involved Yaser
   Esam Hamdi, an American citizen being held as an unlawful enemy
   combatant on a naval brig in Virginia. Two years later, in a case
   involving a Guantánamo detainee, Salim Hamdan, the Supreme Court said
   the basic protections afforded to all wartime detainees under the
   Geneva Conventions applied to everyone, even to unlawful enemy
   combatants outside America.

   The court also ruled that Mr Bush had exceeded his authority in
   setting up, without congressional approval, special military
   commissions to try some of the Guantánamo detainees. In response, the
   president pushed through the 2006 Military Commissions Act giving him
   just such authority. That law also stripped Guantánamo detainees of
   any vestige of habeas corpus rights, with retroactive effect. This
   seemed to dash the hopes of hundreds of Guantánamo detainees with
   challenges pending before American civilian courts. In April, that
   view appeared to be confirmed when the Supreme Court turned down,
   without comment, a habeas corpus petition from the above-mentioned Mr
   Hamdan. But in June it relented, agreeing to hear an almost identical
   case from another Guantánamo detainee. Many hope the Supreme Court
   will seize this opportunity to give a view on whether Mr Bush's "war
   on terror" is a real war.

   The legislators strike back

   Congress, too, is beginning to show its teeth, particularly now it is
   under Democratic control. Although Senator Specter's bipartisan bill
   to restore habeas corpus rights to Guantánamo detainees fell to a
   Republican filibuster on September 19th, it got the support of 56
   senators, including four Republicans. Other bills pending before
   Congress seek the total closure of Guantánamo with the transfer of the
   detainees either to their home countries, if they do not present too
   big a threat and if those countries are willing to take them; or to a
   military prison in America.

   In Britain, too, Parliament has baulked at some of the government's
   demands. In 2005, when Mr Blair sought to push through a bill raising
   the time a suspected terrorist could be detained from 14 to 90 days,
   his backbenchers revolted, eventually settling on the compromise of 28
   days, with regular judicial oversight. Some British officials have
   been looking with envy at civil-law countries like France, where the
   criminal-justice system allows detention for months, even years, after
   a suspect has been formally "placed under investigation", but not yet
   charged. Police can also continue to interrogate suspects during that
   time.

   But most legal commentators believe that if the French model were
   copied in this area, an unbearable blow would be dealt to England's
   common-law system. And despite the fears of civil libertarians, there
   are still judges and legislators who think that system worth
   preserving.

