
                                                                  Reuters

                                  Reuters

   The persuasive powers of reformed jihadists are being used to
   "re-educate" terrorists. This story looks at Indonesia, the next looks
   at the Middle East (see [3]article) 

   MEETING Nasir Abas at one of Indonesia's trendiest hotels, it is hard
   to imagine that this polite man in casual Western clothes was once a
   leader of Jemaah Islamiah (JI), the region's most dangerous terrorist
   group. Now his job is to persuade his former comrades to give up the
   idea of perpetrating violence against the West in the name of Islam.

   As he explains in his mild-mannered way, he uses two lines of
   argument. One is theological: he points out the verses in the Koran
   that forbid aggressive warfare, and which insist that the lives of
   non-combatants, especially women and children, must be protected. The
   other line is more strategic: to convince his listeners that not all
   Westerners are anti-Muslim, he stresses the fact that many Americans
   opposed the war in Iraq. And he challenges them: have terrorist bombs
   made people respect Islam more? Some prisoners angrily reject his
   arguments, he says--but as long as they are still prepared to listen
   to them, he thinks it worth continuing to try.

   Indonesia's anti-terrorism police, like their counterparts in many
   other countries, have set up a programme to "deradicalise" Islamist
   militants. Just as the internet now provides "courses" designed to
   persuade young Muslims that terrorist violence is legitimate--by
   arguing, for example, that killing civilians might be necessary in
   some circumstances--governments and traditional theologians are
   working hard to develop and use arguments that guide people the other
   way.

   In many countries, moderate Islamic clerics are expected to do most of
   the persuading--and they must run the risk of being viewed as
   government stooges. The Indonesian authorities have taken the risky
   step of using ex-militants, some of whom have only slightly moderated
   their views on when violence is acceptable.

   Like many of the jihadists round the world who enjoy sufficient
   "street credibility" to sway younger hearts and minds, Mr Abas won his
   spurs as a fighter in the American-backed campaign against the Soviet
   occupation of Afghanistan. While some Saudi veterans of that campaign
   began directing their energy against their homeland, Mr Abas--who was
   born in Singapore but grew up in Malaysia--returned to his own native
   region to spread the ultra-Islamist fire. He set up a JI network in
   the Philippines.

   He had moved to Jakarta by the time the group bombed a nightclub in
   Bali in 2002, killing 202 people. He insists he was not involved in
   that operation and always disapproved of attacking civilians. But as a
   leading strategist in the organisation and the brother-in-law of one
   of the main conspirators, Mukhlas, he was arrested and given a short
   jail sentence.

   The 2002 bombing, followed by others against foreign targets in Bali
   and Jakarta, forced an overhaul of Indonesia's police and intelligence
   services. As JI members were rounded up, two new police squads decided
   to see if they could get some of them to co-operate. Through
   kindnesses, such as arranging family visits, they hoped to dispel the
   jihadists' assumption that all policemen are thoghut (un-Islamic), and
   thereby to encourage them to reconsider other deeply held views. The
   next step was to get those militants who still believed in the
   rightness of the bombings to listen to those, like Mr Abas, who had
   disapproved of them all along, or other co-operating but harder-line
   militants like Ali Imron, who had become convinced that the attacks
   were wrong only more recently.

   Unlike many other Muslim countries that are experimenting with
   deradicalisation schemes--these include Egypt, Yemen, Saudi Arabia and
   Algeria--Indonesia has a relatively open political system where the
   actions of the police must face public and parliamentary scrutiny.
   There was uproar when the police handlers of the scheme were seen
   treating Mr Imron, who was directly implicated in the Bali bombings,
   to coffee at a fancy Jakarta mall in 2004. Since then he has kept a
   lower profile, staying at the capital's police headquarters. In
   another sign of Indonesia's openness, the authorities gave an
   independent think-tank, the International Crisis Group (ICG), enough
   access to make a broad evaluation of their scheme.

   The ICG's report, in late November, was fairly positive, though it
   expressed some serious worries. Its main one was that the extreme
   corruption and disorder found in Indonesia's prisons may be negating
   all the scheme's attempts to persuade jailed militants that the system
   they are fighting is not utterly thoghut. With some prisoners
   rejecting attempts to deradicalise them, the ICG says the scheme may
   be succeeding only on those who are not particularly dangerous. The
   ICG's Sidney Jones says JI has gone "dormant", so it may no longer
   make sense to focus efforts on its members. Meanwhile, the unreformed
   radicals may be recruiting among the ranks of ordinary prisoners as
   fast as the police-run scheme is deradicalising. And, outside the
   prison walls, other influences such as the dozens of pesantren
   (boarding schools) run openly by JI men, may be turning out more young
   militants.

   A policeman close to the project admits that probably, more radicals
   are being created than are being won over to moderation. But he
   insists that the project has at least got prisoners to divulge
   valuable intelligence. The country now has some policemen with insight
   into the militants' thinking--before, they hadn't a clue. This has
   helped police round up many of JI's leaders including, in June, the
   group's presumed military chief, Abu Dujana, who went on trial this
   week. And there have been no more bombs since 2005.

   Still, any crime-fighting strategy based on the idea of "taking a
   thief to catch a thief" can encounter ethical dilemmas. In Indonesia,
   some of the people the police hired to deradicalise prisoners are only
   marginally less militant than those being lectured to. Mr Imron
   apparently still argues that bombings could be legitimate in
   Indonesia--if there were sufficient public support for them.

   The police's rationale for letting him argue this is that his fairly
   extreme views give him more credibility among his "pupils" than
   someone more moderate and pro-establishment could ever have. As the
   ICG report notes, the whole project is based on the assumption that,
   by bolstering a somewhat more moderate Islamic view of the world, the
   most radical, violent variety is weakened. That is hard to
   disprove--but by lending credibility to some relatively fundamentalist
   views by paying someone to argue them, the authorities may be in
   danger of appearing to endorse them.

   For all the doubts, Indonesia's deradicalisation programme does at
   least seem more likely to produce positive results than the methods
   being tried in Thailand's Muslim-majority southern provinces. The army
   (which seized power in a coup last year) has scooped up hundreds of
   young Muslims merely suspected of "links" to the region's separatist
   uprising, and sent them to camps for compulsory "job training". Last
   month a group of almost 400 of them won a court order declaring their
   detention illegal. If any policy is likely to turn locals against the
   authorities and act as a recruiting-sergeant for militants, this is
   it.

