
   America lags behind its peers in preventing avoidable deaths 

   COMPARING the health systems of different countries is a tricky
   business. Even if you look at countries in the same income bracket,
   there are plenty of factors, from demography to culture, that confuse
   the picture. But a new study of data from 19 prosperous nations draws
   one firm conclusion: despite being the top spender per head on health,
   the United States lags painfully, and increasingly, behind other
   wealthy countries in the overall performance of its medical system.

   That harsh judgment is made by Ellen Nolte and Martin McKee,
   researchers at the London School of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine.
   They looked at deaths that should have been preventable by proper
   health care in people under the age of 75. These include deaths
   resulting from bacterial infections, treatable cancers, diabetes and
   surgical complications; over a fifth of male deaths and nearly a third
   of female deaths result from such causes.

   They found that the group as a whole did well in tackling this
   problem: the decline in what they call "amenable mortality" averaged
   16% across these countries from 1997 to 2003: the decline was 17% for
   men and 14% for women. But the news was not so good in the United
   States; it had the worst record of the countries studied. America cut
   "amenable" deaths by only 4% during that period; it fell to bottom of
   the table.

   The study makes two sharp observations. First, countries that started
   off with low levels of avoidable deaths (like France) and those with
   higher levels (like Britain) saw big improvements, even as America
   lagged. Second, merely by lifting its performance to the level of the
   average rich country, America could avoid perhaps 75,000 "excess
   deaths" per year; if it matched the top three, it could save 100,000
   lives a year. There are things to be said in the American system's
   defence; for example, it has an impressive history of medical
   innovation. But for Americans wondering what their country's big
   spending on health care really buys, the conclusions are sobering.

