
                                                                  Reuters

                                  Reuters

   First admitted to the Group of Eight as a gesture of goodwill and
   support for reform, Russia is concentrating its partners' minds--with
   offers and threats

   WHEN he met Vladimir Putin in 2001, George Bush said he had looked the
   Russian president in the eye and got a "sense of his soul" as a
   trustworthy man. Six years later, as the two leaders meet at the G8
   summit in Germany, Westerners studying Mr Putin's inner self will more
   likely see a tough strategic adversary.

   As Russia heads towards a new form of authoritarianism, Mr Putin's
   anti-Western rhetoric has grown ever more harsh and reminiscent of the
   cold war. This year has seen a crescendo of attacks. It started with
   Mr Putin's accusation in February that America's "unconstrained
   hyper-use of force" threatened the world; intensified in May with an
   implied comparison of America with Nazi Germany; and climaxed this
   month with a threat to re-target Russia's nuclear missiles on Europe.

   If you believe him, Mr Putin's rage reflects his fear that the nuclear
   balance is being upset by Mr Bush's plan to put a limited missile
   defence system on Czech and Polish soil. "It is clear that if part of
   the US nuclear capability turns up in Europe...then we are forced to
   take corresponding steps in response," Mr Putin told a group of
   foreign journalists ahead of the summit. "What will those steps be?
   Naturally, we will have to have new targets in Europe."

   So the era of nuclear mutual assured destruction (or MAD, the cold-war
   stability derived from the knowledge that if one side fired its
   rockets, the other could launch a devastating counter-attack), which
   supposedly ended when the red flag came down, could return. A Kremlin
   spokesman called his leader's comments a "hypothetical answer to a
   hypothetical question". But they were no slip of the tongue; similar
   remarks had been made earlier by a Russian general. Mr Putin, it
   seems, wants to make Western states see the depth of his anger.

   America says the missile defence system is not aimed at Russia; it is
   designed to ward off Iranian missiles that may, one day, carry nuclear
   weapons. But for Mr Putin, the anti-missile shield is just a bid to
   revive the old Star Wars programme against the Kremlin--if not now,
   then in the future. Mr Putin has never liked America's missile
   defence, but seemed to acquiesce when Mr Bush quit the Anti-Ballistic
   Missile (ABM) treaty in 2002. America and Russia at the time made an
   agreement to reduce nuclear warheads to 1,700-2,200 each.

   Several things have happened since those friendlier days. America has
   been weakened by the war in Iraq. Russia has grown richer on oil, and
   Mr Putin angrier over the expansion of NATO to his borders and
   especially the pro-Western "orange revolution" in Ukraine in 2004.

   America's decision to build even limited missile-defence facilities in
   two ex-Warsaw Pact countries was, to him, an intolerable provocation,
   feeding a sense of encirclement. A week ago, Russia test-fired what it
   said was a new intercontinental ballistic missile with multiple
   warheads, able to counteract any missile shield. Mr Putin blamed
   America for starting a new arms race. Recently he has rattled other
   pillars of the post-cold-war order. In February a Russian general said
   his country could quit the Intermediate-Range Nuclear Forces (INF)
   treaty; in April Mr Putin threatened to freeze participation in the
   pact on Conventional Forces in Europe (CFE).

   The Kremlin has given mixed signals about how far it will seek to
   nullify these accords, and how much these moves have been caused by
   the missile-defence row. Mr Putin has opposed the missile defences
   being proposed for Europe by saying Iran's rockets are no imminent
   threat to NATO. But on June 7th he surprised the Americans by
   proposing Azerbaijan as an alternative site--where the United States
   and Russia could jointly erect a missile shield, serving both European
   and Russian needs.

   Russia has acted up in one forum after another--NATO, the European
   Union and the Organisation for Security and Co-operation in Europe--so
   far with little result. It has called an emergency meeting of parties
   to the CFE treaty in Vienna next week. Mr Putin berates NATO for not
   ratifying an amended (1999) text of the CFE pact. (NATO cites Russia's
   failure to keep its pledge to withdraw forces from Georgia and
   Moldova; Russian troops remain in both countries, as "peacekeepers"
   which in reality prop up pro-Kremlin statelets.)

   Western replies to Mr Putin's outbursts have so far been muted. Mr
   Bush insists the missile-defence plan is open to Russian
   participation. "Russia is not an enemy," he said this week, playing
   down Mr Putin's nuclear threats. He has sent a succession of senior
   officials to Moscow to mollify Russia, with little success. He has
   also issued an unprecedented invitation to his "friend" Vladimir to
   meet him at his parents' home in Maine on July 1st.

   Some Americans feel the worsening mood reflects Western mistakes too.
   "When Russia tried to co-operate, it got ignored, and now when it
   behaves badly it gets attention," argues Toby Gati, an ex-White House
   adviser. Mr Putin may be genuinely aggrieved that America has taken
   his past co-operation for granted--for instance in the war against
   terror. He may also reckon that by hitting the West hard on missile
   defence, he may exacerbate divisions in the Western camp.

   The tone of Mr Putin's latest comments also reflects a mood of
   mounting tension after the request by Britain's Crown Prosecution
   Service for the extradition of a former KGB officer, Andrei Lugovoi.
   Britain wants to try him for the murder by radioactive poisoning of an
   exiled ex-secret policeman, Alexander Litvinenko, in London. Mr Putin
   seemed more irked by what he called the "foolish" extradition bid than
   by the substance of the case. He says it is constitutionally all but
   impossible for him to accept the request--and apparently feels pushed
   into a corner. To extradite Mr Lugovoi or try him at home would be
   kowtowing to the West (and betraying a KGB ex-colleague); by doing
   nothing, he may seem to be protecting a murder suspect.

   The Russian leader may feel he has little to lose by antagonising the
   West. But the main effects of his cutting loose from global
   obligations may be felt not so much by the West as by opponents at
   home. Mr Putin recently made an obscure quip, saying that, apart from
   himself, there have been no "pure democrats" in the world since
   Mahatma Gandhi. Garry Kasparov, a chess champion turned opposition
   figure, begs to differ: he calls his country a "police state
   masquerading as a democracy".

