
   Wanted: medicine for a group whose voice is still too small to be
   heard

   IMAGINE a class of human beings, amounting to about one-third of
   world's population, whose needs are barely noticed by the people who
   are dealing with all the most pressing public-health problems. In
   fact, such a group exists: children, especially those in poor
   countries who are often among the first victims of epidemics and other
   life-threatening upheavals.

   According to the World Health Organisation (WHO), about 60 essential
   medicines are unavailable in formulations appropriate for use by
   children. A general lack of child-friendly drugs has been made more
   obvious by the particular difficulty of treating children with
   HIV/AIDS, who have to ingest massive doses of nasty stuff. "Some kids
   with HIV need to take 12 huge tablets a day...and they taste
   horrible," says Hans Hogerzeil, a specialist on medicines at the WHO.
   There are no suitable combination drugs--medicines that have two or
   more active ingredients, thus reducing the number of pills needed--no
   soluble tablets and very few syrups, he adds.

   In the hope of making these and other medicines go down in at least a
   more bearable way, the WHO is trying to raise $50m from its member
   governments, for a fund that would kick-start the development of
   children's drugs--and highlight the need for governments and firms to
   pay more attention to youngsters' medical needs. Some rich countries
   have already taken steps in that direction. For example, America's
   Best Pharmaceuticals for Children Act, passed in 2002, puts more onus
   on the Food and Drug Administration to take children's needs into
   account when certifying drugs. But that law has more to do with
   avoiding risk to children than with helping positively to treat them.

   Creating new drugs for children, especially babies, is not a
   straightforward business. Children metabolise drugs in a way that is
   quite different from adults. And when combination drugs are put
   together--for HIV/AIDS, for example--the proportions that suit
   children are not the same as those needed by grown-ups. In fact,
   combination pills for children can be three times more expensive than
   adult doses, because they are harder to make. Still, the WHO has
   identified a dozen combination drugs that ought to be developed in
   order to treat children with malaria, tuberculosis and HIV/AIDS.

   The WHO wants some of its proposed fund to pay for the basic research
   necessary to create children's formulations. It will initially focus
   on a small group of diseases that account for most deaths among the
   under-fives, including HIV/AIDS, malaria, tuberculosis, pneumonia and
   various forms of diarrhoea. The biggest problems in children's
   medicine concern diseases that afflict the poor. But the shortage of
   child-friendly medicine is not confined to poor countries. Even in
   Europe, fewer than half of the drugs administered to children have
   been tested and authorised for their use. And there are gaps in the
   treatment of diseases not unusual among rich-world children, including
   epilepsy and psychotic conditions.

   At present, very few clinical trials are conducted in children, partly
   because obtaining "informed consent" is hardly possible. (The WHO
   hopes that countries can at least compare notes on how to get round
   that problem.) This in turn deters pharmaceutical firms from
   researching and developing child-friendly medicines, and generic drug
   producers from producing low-cost versions. And before testing any new
   formulation on children, paediatric specialists have to make very hard
   judgments about the benefits and risks.

   However, there are also risks in not creating children's drugs. At the
   moment, the lack of proper formulations forces health workers and
   parents to use fractions of the adult dosage; or else they resort to
   makeshift solutions such as crushing pills (and mixing them with
   something nice) or dissolving portions of capsules in water.

   The WHO's hope is that by putting some public funds into research, it
   will lessen the risks for private firms, and simultaneously "convince
   and shame them into investing a bit more". The Geneva-based body is
   also giving gentle encouragement to those companies that have already
   started trying to close some of the more scandalous gaps. For example,
   the latest drugs for malaria, based on artemisin, have no
   child-friendly version, despite the fact that fully 40% of malaria
   cases occur in children. Sanofi-aventis, a pharmaceutical firm based
   in Paris, has been working to develop a new malaria drug for children.
   The WHO is backing this effort by helping the company make
   evaluations; the drug may soon--perhaps as early as February--be
   approved for UN procurement.

   As for tuberculosis, another deadly killer of the young, no effective,
   child-friendly drug exists at present, even though the scientific
   knowledge to produce one certainly does. That is just one reason, say
   the policymakers at the WHO, why urgent action is needed to give that
   big, voiceless interest group a better chance of growing up.

