
   In a propaganda coup for "re-educators" across the Muslim world, a
   jailed ideologue of violence changes his mind

                                                                      AFP
                                                                      AFP

                                              Zawahiri: unfazed by faxes 

   WHEN an eloquent advocate of terrorist violence deploys his rhetorical
   powers and scriptural knowledge in the opposite cause, that is a
   triumph for the authorities--even if the "repentant" extremist is in
   prison, and has presumably been under strong pressure, to put it
   mildly, to alter his thinking.

   That has just happened in Egypt--a country whose theological debates,
   whether in jails, Friday sermons or over the internet, matter a lot,
   and can reverberate across the Muslim world. One of the main
   ideologues of the Islamic Jihad movement--Sayed al-Shareef, better
   known as Doctor Fadl--has produced an elaborate recantation of his
   extremist views. His revised opinions have been serialised in several
   newspapers.

   For Egyptians, this is a new twist in a semi-public argument that has
   been going on since the massacre of 58 tourists in Luxor in 1997. That
   atrocity prompted a wave of questioning within jihadist ranks. Over
   the next few years, imprisoned leaders of the Jamaa Islamiya, the
   Egyptian group to which the Luxor killers claimed allegiance,
   published a series of works condemning this act, deploring the group's
   previous use of violence, and redefining jihad in more peaceful terms.

   Those recantations are often cited as a reason for a fall-off in
   Islamist terrorism inside Egypt. But leaders of Islamic Jihad--the
   other ultra-militant group in Egypt--rejected the new moderate line.
   Its overseas branch, led by Ayman al-Zawahiri, forged an alliance with
   Osama bin Laden's al-Qaeda. Global jihadism still thrived, and it
   returned to Egypt with attacks on beach resorts in Sinai in 2004 and
   2005.

   So the latest reversal by a prominent member of Islamic Jihad is a
   dramatic event--even if it prompted Mr Zawahiri to ask caustically
   whether Egyptian jail cells now had fax machines, and whether they ran
   on the same electricity source as the instruments of torture.

   Mr al-Shareef's credentials as an ideologue are "second to none," says
   Stephen Ulph, a terrorism-watcher at the Jamestown Foundation, a
   think-tank. In recent years, Mr al-Shareef had defended the legitimacy
   of violence against regimes that purported to be Muslim but were not
   zealous enough to deserve the name. Now he has reversed that stance,
   warning against branding fellow-Muslims as infidels.

   As a theological statement, the new line from Mr al-Shareef dovetails
   with the positions developed by establishment scholars in several
   other Arab states where deradicalisation programmes are in progress.
   Some governments claim these have been very successful. Saudi Arabia
   says that out of perhaps 3,000 terrorist suspects and sympathisers
   arrested since 2003, some two-thirds have agreed to re-education
   programmes. Of these, 700 have renounced former beliefs and been
   released. Beyond religious reindoctrination, the Saudi effort also
   includes psychological counselling and, perhaps crucially, direct
   financial and social support to help woo radicals back to "civilian"
   life.

   Yemen claims to have rehabilitated hundreds of former radicals, and
   points to the diminution of terrorist attacks as one result. Egypt has
   reduced its prison population of jihadist suspects from an estimated
   20,000 in the late 1990s to below 5,000 today.

   Yet some people doubt the effectiveness of either re-education or
   high-profile penitence in reducing the jihadist urge. One important
   question is whether jihadist violence is primarily a product of
   religious ideology, or of geopolitical grievance. The feeling that
   Islam is "under threat" in many parts of the world is arguably a
   politically motivated cry of victimhood rather than a statement about
   the meaning of sacred texts.

   Even the al-Shareef recantation, like those of the Jamaa Islamiya,
   seems to accept the legitimacy in principle of violent jihad in
   defence of the faith. Once you accept that proposition, it can rapidly
   lead to a hard argument--more political than theological--over who is
   on the attack, and who is on the defensive, in the relationship
   between Islam and the rest of the world.

