
   Have the terrorist attacks of September 11th 2001 put a lasting dent
   in civil liberties? The first of a series begins this week with a look
   at torture

   IN EVERY war, information is a weapon. In a "war against terrorism",
   where the adversary wears no uniform and hides among the civilian
   population, information can matter even more. But does that mean that
   torture can sometimes be justified to extract information?

   The answer in international law is categorical: no. As laid down in
   treaties such as the Geneva Conventions, the UN Convention against
   Torture and the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights,
   the ban on torture or any cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment is
   absolute, even in times of war. Along with genocide, torture is the
   only crime that every state must punish, no matter who commits it or
   where. Defenders of this blanket prohibition offer arguments that
   range from the moral (torture degrades and corrupts the society that
   allows it) to the practical (people will say anything under torture so
   the information they provide is unreliable anyway).

   The September 11th attacks have not driven any rich democracy to
   reverse itself and make torture legal. But they have encouraged the
   bending of definitions and the turning of blind eyes. There is a
   greater readiness among governments that would never practise torture
   themselves to use information which less squeamish states have
   obtained--through torture.

   Start with definitions. Most civilised people squirm at the thought of
   putting suspected terrorists on the rack or pulling off toenails. What
   if that prisoner knew the whereabouts of a ticking bomb--maybe a
   biological, chemical or even nuclear one? Wouldn't a little sleep
   deprivation, sexual humiliation or even water-dunking be justified to
   save hundreds and perhaps thousands of lives? Whatever the law says, a
   lot of people seem to think so.

   In a BBC survey of 27,000 people in 25 countries last October, more
   than one out of three people in nine of those countries, including
   America, considered a degree of torture acceptable if it saved lives.
   Opposition was highest in most European and English-speaking countries
   (see chart). Another poll in 2005 by the Pew Research Centre found
   that nearly half of all Americans thought the torture of suspected
   terrorists was sometimes justified.

   Two Republican presidential hopefuls, Rudy Giuliani and Mitt Romney,
   support the "enhanced" interrogation of suspects in the event of an
   imminent attack. Dick Cheney, America's vice-president, recently
   suggested that "dunking" a terrorist in water to save lives was a
   "no-brainer". The ensuing uproar led him to backtrack, claiming that
   he was not, of course, referring to "water-boarding", or simulated
   drowning, a technique regarded as tantamount to torture and banned in
   the American army's own interrogation manual.

   I'll tickle you into submission

   One objection to allowing moderate physical pressure is the difficulty
   of knowing where to draw the line. If stress positions and sleep
   deprivation do not work, do you progress to branding with red-hot
   irons and beating to a pulp? And can you rely on interrogators to heed
   such distinctions? It is the danger of a slippery slope that makes
   opponents of torture insist on a total ban.

   Israel is the only country in modern times to have openly allowed
   "moderate physical pressure" as a "last resort". Since interrogators
   used such methods anyway, it was argued, passing an explicit law would
   at least make it possible to set out some limits. But in 1999, citing
   the slippery-slope argument, Israel's Supreme Court ruled that torture
   could never be justified, even in the case of a ticking bomb. It went
   on to outlaw techniques such as sleep deprivation, exposure to
   extremes of hot and cold, prolonged stress positions, hooding and
   violent shaking.

   In the 1970s Britain used similar techniques against suspected
   terrorists in Northern Ireland. These were banned in 1978 following a
   case brought by the Republic of Ireland to the European Court of Human
   Rights. Although not torture, such methods did amount to inhumane
   treatment, the court ruled. In 2002 the International Criminal Court
   for ex-Yugoslavia in The Hague decided that prolonged solitary
   confinement constituted torture. Such rulings did not prevent America
   from resorting to such harsh techniques when interrogating suspects in
   Afghanistan, Iraq and Guantánamo Bay, however. Former detainees in
   those places have spoken of severe beatings, water-boarding,
   excruciating stress positions, mock executions, sleep deprivation and
   much else besides.

   Administration lawyers argued that since al-Qaeda and its Taliban
   allies were not a state party to the Geneva Conventions they were not
   covered by its ban on torture and other maltreatment. True, America
   had ratified (in 1988) the Convention against Torture, but that
   applied only to acts carried out on American soil, they said. And
   though America's own 1994 federal statute against torture did cover
   acts by Americans abroad, this applied only to full-blown torture, not
   lesser abuses.

   In the notorious "torture memos" drawn up by the Department of Justice
   and the Pentagon in 2002 and 2003, the same lawyers sought to restrict
   the normal definition of torture--"severe pain or suffering"--to
   extreme acts equivalent to "serious physical injury, organ failure, or
   even death". Furthermore, as a wartime commander in chief whose main
   duty was to protect the American people, the president had the power
   to override both domestic and international law, they argued. After
   being leaked in 2004 most of these memos were "withdrawn", though not
   the one on the president's wartime powers.

   Mr Bush and his colleagues have always said that America neither
   authorises nor condones torture. "We don't do torture," the president
   famously said. But Mr Bush has been vaguer about the grey area between
   torture and more moderate pressure. Soon after suspected terrorists
   were first sent to Guantánamo in January 2002 he said that America's
   armed forces would treat the detainees "humanely" in a manner
   "consistent with the Geneva Conventions"--but only "to the extent
   appropriate and consistent with military necessity".

   Not until the Supreme Court's ruling in Hamdan in 2006 did the
   administration accept that all detainees, wherever held, were
   protected by Common Article 3 of the Geneva Conventions, which bans
   all forms of cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment as well as torture.
   The 2005 Detainee Treatment Act, incorporating an amendment by Senator
   John McCain, already prohibited such treatment by American soldiers
   anywhere in the world. But it did not apply to the CIA.

   Co-operating with torturers

   Yet it is the CIA that has been responsible for the "extraordinary
   rendition" of suspects to clandestine prisons in third countries for
   "enhanced" interrogation (whether by that country's agents or the CIA
   itself) amounting at times, many suspect, to torture. The programme's
   existence was not officially confirmed until Mr Bush announced last
   year the transfer to Guantánamo of the last 14 "high-value" detainees
   then being held in so-called "black sites" around the world. Of some
   100 suspected terrorists believed to have been "rendered" over the
   past six years, 39 remain unaccounted for, Human Rights Watch, a New
   York-based lobby, says.

   In July this year Mr Bush set out new broad guidelines for
   interrogations under a resumed CIA programme. He says the newly
   authorised techniques now comply fully with the Geneva Conventions'
   ban on "outrages upon personal dignity, in particular humiliating and
   degrading treatment" as well as torture. Even if true (which is hard
   to know because the details have not been disclosed), the programme
   itself with its enforced disappearances and black sites, which even
   the International Red Cross is not allowed to visit, violates basic
   tenets of international law.

   Even if a country bans torture, how should it treat information that
   others have extracted this way? In 2004 Britain's Court of Appeal
   ruled that information acquired through torture was admissible as
   evidence in court. David Blunkett, then Britain's home secretary,
   welcomed the ruling. Although the government "unreservedly" condemned
   torture, he said, it would be "irresponsible not to take appropriate
   account of any information which could help protect national security
   and public safety." But the ruling was later overturned by the House
   of Lords.

   A separate question is whether governments should use information
   extracted under torture by others for counter-terrorist purposes, even
   if it is not admissible as evidence. Most probably agree with Mr
   Blunkett that it would be irresponsible not to. But a case can be made
   that this is, in effect, condoning the use of torture by allies.

   Britain has also run into trouble when trying to deport suspected
   foreign terrorists against whom it has not got enough evidence to
   secure a conviction in court. Under international law, a country must
   make sure that the person it wishes to expel is not in danger of being
   tortured or subjected to other abuse in the receiving country. In 2005
   the UN's special rapporteur on torture criticised Britain for relying
   on "diplomatic assurances" that deportees would not be tortured.
   Charles Clarke, who had succeeded Mr Blunkett as home secretary,
   retorted that the rights of the victims of the London Tube bombings
   that year mattered more than those of the perpetrators. The UN should
   "look at human rights in the round", he said, "rather than simply
   focusing all the time on the terrorist." Fine--except that no British
   court had convicted these suspects as terrorists.

   To date, 144 countries have ratified the Convention against Torture.
   (The hold-outs include such usual suspects as Sudan, North Korea,
   Myanmar and Zimbabwe, but also India.) And yet, the UN's special
   rapporteur told the Security Council in June, torture remains
   widespread. Amnesty International noted cases of state-sponsored
   torture or other inhumane treatment in 102 of the 153 countries
   included in its 2007 report. The worst offenders were China, Egypt
   (both of which are parties to the convention), Myanmar and North
   Korea, along with several African countries. America's transgressions
   are trivial by comparison. The worry, argues Kenneth Roth, director of
   Human Rights Watch, is that when America breaks the rules it
   encourages others to do the same.

                                                                       AP

                                     AP

       The scandal of Abu Ghraib: a recruiting poster for terrorists

   Why does torture endure? Part of the reason, argues Michael Ignatieff,
   a Canadian writer, may be that it is at times motivated not so much by
   a desire to extract vital information but by something baser, such as
   an urge to inflict pain, exact revenge, or even just for fun. That
   seems to have been part of the motivation of the Americans who abused
   prisoners in Abu Ghraib, for example. But torture may also endure
   because it sometimes works.

   They'll say anything

   Many critics of torture claim that it is ineffective as well as
   repugnant. Since people will say anything just to stop the pain, the
   information gleaned may not be reliable. On the other hand, if people
   do say anything under torture, you might expect some of what they say
   to be true and therefore--if those being tortured really are
   terrorists--useful to the authorities. Torture certainly helped induce
   Guy Fawkes to betray his co-conspirators after they had tried to blow
   up King James I and the British Parliament on November 5th 1605.

   Asked recently about the CIA's use of enhanced interrogation in secret
   prisons, George Tenet, the CIA's director until 2004, replied that the
   agency's widely condemned rendition programme had saved lives,
   disrupted plots and provided "invaluable" information in the war
   against terrorism. Indeed, while denying the use of full-blown
   torture, he said that the programme on its own was "worth more than
   the FBI, the CIA and the National Security Agency put together have
   been able to tell us."

   Mr Ignatieff, for his own part, sees no trumping argument on behalf of
   terrorists that makes their claims to human rights and dignity prevail
   over the security interests--and right to life--of the majority. Yet
   he continues to advocate a total ban. "We cannot torture, in other
   words, because of who we are," he says. He knows that many will
   disagree.

