
                                                            Claudio Munoz

                               Claudio Munoz

   Some old sores (and a few new ones, too) have been opened by Europe's
   muddled reaction to America's missile-defence plans

   ON THE face of things, the argument is all about a handful of missiles
   which, whatever their wider role, will make no difference to the
   balance of power in Europe. But the deep, multiple fault lines that
   the row is laying bare--both within the Atlantic alliance, and between
   the alliance and Russia--seem all too reminiscent of cold-war politics
   at their dismal worst.

   To cut a lengthening story short, America hopes to deploy parts of an
   anti-ballistic-missile system on the soil of two NATO allies: just ten
   fairly simple interceptors in Poland, and a radar system, able to
   track incoming missiles as they hurtle through space, in the Czech
   Republic. And senior Russians, especially the top brass, are growling
   in response. They are adamant that the new installations threaten
   their national security--despite America's insistence that the
   interceptors are aimed only at stopping the rockets from rogue
   (potential) nuclear powers like Iran.

   Sergei Lavrov, Russia's foreign minister, gave the argument a new
   twist this week by asserting that shafts used for interceptors could
   easily be adapted to accommodate offensive weapons. At the same time,
   indignant Russians add, the new kit is not such a threat that they
   couldn't deal with it easily. "Since missile-defence elements are
   weakly protected, all types of our aircraft are capable of applying
   electronic counter-measures against them or physically destroying
   them," declared one general, Igor Khvorov, this month.

   The American in charge of building the new shield, General Henry
   Obering, has painstakingly spelled out reasons why the system's
   location should be a source of reassurance, not concern, to the
   Kremlin: the sites on NATO's eastern flank are in the wrong place to
   stop missiles launched from Russian soil. Moreover, he added this
   week, France, Germany, Italy and even western Russia are all potential
   beneficiaries of a system that could, if it works, stop a missile from
   a pariah state in its tracks.

   In any case, Russia's strategic rocket force still comprises hundreds
   of launchers, and thousands of warheads; its capacity, like that of
   America, to annihilate any enemy will remain firmly intact. In franker
   moments--whether in the private comments of officialdom or the public
   words of President Vladimir Putin--the Russians admit that their
   firepower is not really threatened.

   Nor can Russia claim to have been surprised. American officials reel
   off at least ten occasions when they discussed the missile-defence
   project with Russian opposite numbers. Both Robert Gates, the present
   defence secretary, and his predecessor, Donald Rumsfeld, told their
   Russian counterparts about the plan; General Obering has given a
   briefing in Moscow; and there have been two set-piece discussions in
   the NATO-Russian Council.

   But the dishonesty is not all on the Russian side. Take the muddled
   reaction of politicians in Germany, and the unconvincing efforts by
   the left-right coalition to present a united front over the issue.

   The instinctive reaction of Frank-Walter Steinmeier, Germany's foreign
   minister and a member of the centre-left Social Democratic Party
   (SPD), was to rebuke America for "startling" Russia with talk of
   placing fancy new kit in the neighbourhood. "Because the stationing
   sites are getting closer to Russia, one should have talked with Russia
   first," he chided. The SPD chairman, Kurt Beck, went further. He has
   called the missile-defence plan a prelude to an arms race, and said:
   "We don't need new missiles in Europe."

   In a fitting response, perhaps, to an artificial row, Germany's
   political masters have devised an artificial solution--at least to the
   internal German dilemma. Chancellor Angela Merkel, a Christian
   Democrat whose instincts are more Atlanticist than those of her
   coalition partners, has signalled through a spokesman that she wants
   to "NATO-ise" the issue of new missile defences.

   What does that mean? Not much, in practice--but this ugly word
   reflects the political fact that to some European ears, the common
   deliberations, and ultimately common decisions, of NATO have a
   slightly softer, fuzzier sound than anything done unilaterally by the
   United States. NATO, after all, is a partnership in which all members,
   at least formally, have a say.

   Others are now jumping aboard the "NATO-ising" bandwagon, including
   politicians in the Czech Republic, where a poll showed just 31% of
   voters in favour of the shield. According to the foreign minister,
   Karel Schwarzenberg, many Czech legislators would find it much easier
   to support the installation if "it could be included somehow in the
   NATO system".

   In hard military reality, the new system cannot be included. The
   radars and interceptors will be built by America, and controlled by
   America, and deployed by bilateral agreement with the hosts. If people
   hope for a non-American, or NATO, finger on interceptor buttons, they
   will be let down. In Berlin earlier this month, General Obering was
   asked whether his system should be brought into NATO. "I believe this
   system would complement NATO very nicely," he replied carefully.

   As it happens, NATO has for years been preparing for the more limited
   option of a theatre missile defence, which could indeed be jointly
   procured and managed by the alliance. But strategic interceptors,
   albeit few in number, are another matter: the Pentagon won't share the
   keys with anyone. This week, a Pentagon official stated, at a
   congressional hearing, that the need for unanimous decision-making in
   NATO made it the wrong place to decide how missile defences should be
   deployed.

   Even if it is phoney in parts, the missile-defence row cannot be
   shrugged off easily. Senior American officials find it dispiriting
   that Russia has again divided Europe. When Russian generals threatened
   to attack missile-defence sites in Poland and the Czech Republic, some
   European politicians fretted that Russia was being "pushed into a
   corner", to quote Luxembourg's foreign minister. The fact that
   Europeans are more protective of Russia than of their newish NATO
   partners does not bode well for alliance solidarity.

   One centre-right German member of parliament, Karl-Theodor zu
   Guttenberg, said it was "worrisome" that so many German voters, even
   on the right, proved receptive to Russian arguments. Mr Putin's
   anti-American speech at a conference in Munich last month seems--as Mr
   zu Guttenberg puts it--to have been "rather ridiculous, but
   effective".

   Even among new NATO members where voters are broadly pro-American,
   affection is wearing thin, and the Iraq war's toxic effect is being
   felt. Iraq explains why 51% of Poles opposed the missile-defence plan
   in one recent survey, says Radek Sikorski, an Atlanticist Pole who
   recently lost his job as defence minister amid a row over how exactly
   to negotiate with the United States over missile defences.

   The Polish government may agree to host interceptors, but parliament
   could still say no, says Mr Sikorski: "This is blowback from Iraq. We
   used to take things on trust from the United States in the security
   field"--but that is no longer the case.

   America wants a swift decision from Poland and the Czech Republic,
   ideally this year, so the first interceptors can be in place in 2011
   (though Tony Blair's offer of Britain as an alternative site for
   interceptor missiles remains on the table). Such assent is not a
   foregone conclusion.

   The missile-defence row has also exposed a second fissure in NATO's
   ranks, about the very idea of deterrence. The nuclear states, Britain
   and France, broadly agree that peace is guaranteed by great powers
   being able to deter threats credibly: hence France's (discreet)
   support for an American shield.

   But in some parts of Europe, America's wish to keep a deterrent
   capability in the face of new threats is seen as destabilising. Mr
   Steinmeier asserted this month that peace was "no longer based on
   military deterrence but on the willingness for co-operation." Others
   close to the SPD grassroots are blunter. Rolf Mützenich, an SPD
   spokesman on disarmament, argues that if missile defence gives a sense
   of "100% security" to Americans, "that will bring some problems for
   stability."

   As one NATO hand puts it, the row over missile defences has made plain
   a broader challenge to America's moral sway over its old allies. Four
   years after the assault on Iraq, America can sound a warning about
   threats from rogue states--only to find many European voters would
   rather hear the opposite message from Russia.

