
   In the last of our series on civil liberties, we look at the
   difficulty of reconciling traditional freedoms of expression with the
   new demands of national security

   IN COUNTRIES at war, freedoms of the press and of speech are often
   restricted. For that reason, al-Qaeda's attacks of September 11th
   2001, by precipitating a "war on terror", also raised questions--both
   legal and moral--about the role of the media in free societies.

   Several Western governments have used national security as a
   justification for limiting certain sorts of public information and
   public speech. The press itself has been torn: sometimes it has
   refused to accept limits on its freedom of expression (as when
   newspapers worldwide published cartoons of the prophet Muhammad that
   were offensive to Muslims); sometimes it has accepted them (as when
   those newspapers apologised). Meanwhile, the media have managed to
   continue their normal work, uncovering abuses at the Guantánamo and
   Abu Ghraib prisons, for example. So what has happened to freedom of
   expression under the war on terror?

   If you take at face value the lip service that almost all countries
   pay to a free press--160 of the United Nation's 192 members have
   ratified the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights
   (ICCPR)--then freedom of expression has had a tough time. In Pakistan
   this summer, lawyers and pro-democracy activists took to the streets
   to demand the reinstatement of the country's chief justice after his
   removal by General Pervez Musharraf. They succeeded. But more than 30
   journalists covering later demonstrations against the general's
   pursuit of another term as president were injured when the police used
   violence against the protestors. China, whose constitution states that
   its citizens "enjoy freedom of speech...[and] of the press", has
   announced a new crackdown on "false news". And this week marks the
   first anniversary of the murder in Moscow of Anna Politkovskaya,
   Russia's best-known investigative writer: she is one of 18 journalists
   to be killed in the country since President Vladimir Putin came to
   power in 2000.

   Shooting the messengers

   Reporters Without Borders, a lobbying organisation based in Paris,
   says that 113 journalists and other media workers were killed in 2006
   (half of them in Iraq). Another 86 have been killed and 134 imprisoned
   so far this year, along with 64 "cyberdissidents". The International
   Federation of Journalists, based in Brussels, puts the death toll
   higher, reporting "at least" 155 media workers killed last year.
   Whatever the real numbers, 2006 seems to have been the worst for many
   years, if not ever. In December 2006 the UN for the first time issued
   a statement condemning the targeting of journalists and calling for
   the prosecution of their killers.

   The rising numbers of dead and jailed does not on its own mean that
   press freedom is everywhere in decline. Many of the reporters killed
   in Iraq--more than 200 since the invasion of 2003--have been Iraqis
   working for the foreign media, murdered not so much because they were
   members of the press as because they were regarded by Iraqi insurgents
   as "spies". To some degree, the global increase in the number of
   journalists being killed, kidnapped and otherwise harassed may signify
   that more journalists are at work, and are growing bolder.

   Nonetheless, Freedom House, a conservative American think-tank,
   reckons that press freedom suffered "continued global decline" in
   2006. It reported particularly troubling trends in Asia, the former
   Soviet Union and Latin America. Attacks on the media, Freedom House
   points out, are not only bad in themselves; they are also a sign of
   worse to come, since they are almost invariably followed by assaults
   on other democratic institutions.

   In repressive countries, the arrival of the internet has often been
   greeted by citizens as a wonderful way to bypass government control,
   enabling dissidents to air their views and keep in contact with the
   outside world. For a while, this new medium did seem relatively immune
   to regulation. The rest of the world found out about the first few
   weeks of the Burmese uprising partly through internet cafés in Yangon,
   which had worked out how to disable the military junta's
   internet-blocking software. But the army soon cracked down on the
   Burmese bloggers, just as they cracked down on everything else.

   In a study of the internet in 40 countries (excluding Europe and the
   United States), OpenNet Initiative, an academic think-tank, says that
   censorship of the internet has spread from just a handful of countries
   five years ago to 26 nations. Some--notably China, Iran, Syria,
   Pakistan, Tunisia, Vietnam and Uzbekistan--are now blocking entire
   internet services such as YouTube, Skype and Google Maps.

   Of course, it is not surprising that such countries are suppressing
   freedom of expression. They need little enough excuse to do it, and
   the only connection between their censorship and the war on terror is
   that their Western friends might be more inclined than usual to
   forbear from criticism in case they offend an ally in the war. But
   none of that applies to America.

   Thanks to its constitution, and especially the first amendment, the
   United States gives greater protection to freedom of expression than
   any other country. Free expression generally trumps libel, prejudicial
   comment about pending court cases, and so-called "hate speech". Even
   so, claims Peter Osnos, senior fellow at the Century Foundation, a New
   York-based think-tank, since September 2001 the Bush administration's
   attempts "to intimidate and punish the media, or at least to
   manipulate and mislead it, represents one of the most concerted
   assaults on the first amendment since it was written."

   Under American law, government documents may be classified only to
   protect national security. Presidents have at times no doubt stretched
   the definition, but George Bush has gone further than any. Partly as a
   result of an executive order of 2003, the number of documents being
   stamped secret or classified has almost quadrupled--from 5.8m under
   Bill Clinton in 1996 to more than 20m last year, according to figures
   released by the Information Security Oversight Office (part of
   America's national archives). Peter Galison, a Harvard professor,
   reckons that "the classified universe...is certainly not smaller and
   very probably much larger than [the] unclassified one." If true, more
   is kept hidden than revealed.

   A tilt too far

   Mr Bush has always had a penchant for secrecy. In 2001 he signed an
   executive order allowing a president or vice-president to block the
   release of their papers, perhaps indefinitely, instead of within 12
   years of leaving office.

   But national security is the commonest justification for the vast
   expansion of classification. Seeking to explain his 2003 executive
   order, Mr Bush spoke of the need to strike the right balance between
   security and open government. "Our nation's progress depends on the
   free flow of information," he conceded. "Nevertheless, throughout our
   history, the national defence has required that certain information be
   maintained in confidence in order to protect our citizens, our
   democratic institutions, our homeland security and our interactions
   with foreign nations."

   For many constitutional scholars, members of Congress and most
   journalists, the administration has tilted the balance too far towards
   maintaining "certain information...in confidence". Congress has
   repeatedly been denied access to documents; newspapers have been
   threatened with prosecution for revealing "state secrets" (such as Mr
   Bush's warrantless eavesdropping programme), and journalists have been
   jailed for contempt of court after refusing to reveal their sources.

   In Britain, too, freedom of expression has been under attack. With its
   Official Secrets Act, tough libel laws and tight restrictions on
   post-charge reporting of criminal investigations and trials, Britain
   has always placed more restrictions on free speech than America. It
   has now gone further. The 2006 Terrorism Act makes it a crime to
   publish a statement that "glorifies the commission or preparation" of
   a terrorist act, "whether in the past, in the future, or generally".
   On the face of it, this might make criminal the statue of Nelson
   Mandela recently erected in Parliament Square: parts of the British
   government once regarded him as a terrorist.

   Another British law, passed in 2005, criminalises demonstrations
   within a kilometre of Parliament without police permission, which
   normally has to be obtained at least six days in advance. This has led
   to farcical moments, such as the arrest of a woman picnicking in
   Parliament Square with "PEACE" marked in icing on a cake, and of
   another for reading out the names of British soldiers killed in Iraq.

                                                                      EPA
                                                                      EPA

                                     Politkovskaya, pen cut down by sword

   At the first meeting of the UN General Assembly in London in 1946,
   delegates described freedom of expression as "the touchstone of all
   human rights". In practice, that freedom has never been totally
   unfettered, even in America. As the Supreme Court famously ruled in
   1919, falsely shouting "Fire!" in a crowded theatre is not protected
   by the first amendment. Under the European Convention on Human Rights,
   freedom of expression is subject to a wide range of possible
   restrictions, including national laws banning speech likely to incite
   or "stir up" hatred against people on the basis of race, ethnic
   origin, religion or sexual orientation. Iceland goes further,
   criminalising speech that simply ridicules or insults someone on those
   grounds. Brazil, Singapore, Serbia, New Zealand and the Australian
   state of Victoria have similar race-hate laws.

   Since 2001, these sorts of restrictions have been expanded to apply to
   Muslims. Before the attacks of that year, Britain, for example, had a
   law prohibiting the incitement of racial hatred which applied to Jews
   and Sikhs (because they were deemed by the courts to be racial as well
   as religious groups), but not to Muslims, Christians or others.
   Responding to the rise in verbal and physical attacks on Muslims after
   2001, the government sought to plug that gap, proposing a ban on the
   "reckless" use of "threatening, insulting or abusive" language against
   anyone on the ground of his faith. Free-speech critics insisted that
   some element of intent be involved, claiming that otherwise religious
   works such as the Bible or the Koran could be deemed unlawful.

   The government relented. Under the Racial and Religious Hatred Act,
   which came into force on October 1st, it is now a crime for someone to
   use threatening words or behaviour only "if he intends thereby to stir
   up religious hatred". The new law does not outlaw "expressions of
   antipathy, dislike, ridicule, insult or abuse of particular
   religions". Comedians and satirists will thus be able to continue to
   poke fun at religion without fear of prosecution. But members of the
   far-right British National Party will no longer be able to claim that
   Muslim gangs are grooming and raping British children and women,
   helping turn British society into a "multiracial hell", as Nick
   Griffin, the party's leader, is alleged to have said.

   Shutting up by choice

   Sometimes the press has decided to censor itself. In September 2005 a
   Danish newspaper published cartoons of the prophet Muhammad. After
   violent protests throughout the Muslim world, most Western papers
   decided not to repeat the publication. Some editors who chose
   otherwise were reprimanded or removed. In Yemen and Jordan, they were
   arrested and their papers shut down.

   At other times legislators have decided to curtail free speech for
   what they consider impeccable reasons. In much of mainland Europe, it
   is a crime to deny that the Holocaust took place. Last year David
   Irving, a British revisionist historian, was jailed by Austria for
   three years for this, though attempts to make Holocaust denial a crime
   throughout the European Union got nowhere this year. In Turkey, a
   string of journalists and writers have been prosecuted for the crime
   of "insulting Turkishness", though both the president and prime
   minister say they want to abolish or amend the controversial article
   301 of the penal code on which the prosecutions were based.

   Attempts to gag the press in democratic countries usually fail. In
   America, Congress is considering a bill to allow journalists (and
   bloggers) to protect their sources without fear of prosecution--save
   when national security is at stake. Thomas Jefferson had something to
   say about that. "The only security of all is in a free press," he
   wrote to Lafayette in 1823. "The force of public opinion cannot be
   resisted when permitted freely to be expressed. The agitation it
   produces must be submitted to. It is necessary--to keep the waters
   pure."

