
   Heads of state, past and present, are increasingly being brought to
   book for crimes committed while in office

                                                                       AP

                                     AP

   WHEN Charles Taylor, then president of Liberia, was charged with 11
   counts of war crimes, crimes against humanity and other atrocities in
   June 2003, few thought he would be captured, let alone ever brought to
   justice. But this week, four and a half years after his indictment,
   his trial proper at last began in The Hague. Mr Taylor, now aged 59,
   is the first former African head of state to face an international
   war-crimes court.

   Just a few years ago, such an event would have been almost
   inconceivable. However brutal or corrupt, Africa's leaders used to
   shield one another from justice for fear that their turn could come
   next. But the remarkable spread of international justice over the past
   decade has brought about an equally remarkable change in attitudes
   towards prosecuting former heads of state, not just in Africa but
   throughout the world. No fewer than ten former presidents and military
   dictators are facing legal proceedings for human-rights offences
   and/or corruption, some in international tribunals, others in their
   own domestic courts, a few in other countries' courts.

   In Peru, ex-President Alberto Fujimori is on trial for human-rights
   violations and fraud. He has already been sentenced to six years in
   jail for abuse of power. In Cambodia, Khieu Samphan, president from
   1976 to 1979, is in jail awaiting his turn before a new UN-backed
   tribunal set up to try Khmer Rouge leaders. And in Senegal, Hissène
   Habré, ex-president of Chad, is awaiting trial for crimes against
   humanity before a special court being set up in Dakar.

   Meanwhile, General Suharto, Indonesia's former dictator, aged 86, has
   once again been rushed to hospital in the midst of legal proceedings
   for graft. Previous moves to prosecute him--he is alleged to have
   embezzled $1.54 billion during his 32-year reign--have failed on
   grounds of ill health. But he may have cried wolf too often. Despite
   the general's reported "critical" condition, Indonesia's
   attorney-general vowed to press ahead regardless with civil
   proceedings against him.

   Until recently, heads of state and government, past or present, were
   commonly seen as immune from prosecution for acts, however vile,
   performed as part of their official functions. But in a landmark
   decision in 1999 involving Augusto Pinochet, Chile's ex-dictator,
   Britain's law lords ruled that there could be no immunity for certain
   international crimes such as torture, and that Pinochet could
   therefore be extradited to Spain.

   The fact that the octogenarian was never extradited, being allowed to
   return to Chile instead because of ill health, did not matter. A taboo
   had been broken. A previously hesitant Chile then brought its own
   charges against the ex-president. Although Pinochet died (in December
   2006) before his trial began, the floodgates had been opened. Others
   now felt free to pursue their own tyrants.

   In Latin America, home to many odious military regimes in the 1970s
   and 1980s, charges have been brought--mostly for crimes against
   humanity--against half a dozen former rulers. In Suriname, the trial
   is about to begin of ex-dictator Desi Bouterse, for his role in the
   summary execution of 15 political opponents in 1982. In Uruguay,
   another former ruler, Juan María Bordaberry, is about to be tried on
   charges relating to murders and "disappearances" in the 1970s.

                                                                       AP
                                                                       AP

                                              Wanted back home: Mrs Perón

   Meanwhile, in Spain, María Estela Perón, who succeeded her husband as
   Argentina's president in 1974, is awaiting the outcome of two
   extradition requests from Argentina on charges relating to the killing
   of hundreds of left-wing militants by government-backed execution
   squads.

   She hopes the Spanish courts will adopt the same position as
   Guatemala's Constitutional Court, which last month ruled against the
   extradition to Spain of Efraín Ríos Montt, a former Guatemalan
   dictator, on charges of genocide. Mexico's ex-president, Luis
   Echeverría, may also have been let off the hook after charges relating
   to the killing of student protesters, in 1968 and thereafter, were
   dismissed in July by a Mexican court for falling outside a statute of
   limitations. For most international crimes, there is no time limit.

   Manuel Noriega, a former Panamanian despot, is likely to be less
   lucky. After completing a 17-year sentence in America for
   drug-smuggling in September, he began fighting an extradition request
   by France, where he has already been sentenced in absentia to ten
   years in prison for money-laundering. On January 9th a Florida judge
   rejected his appeal against extradition. He will now probably face a
   retrial.

   Sometimes a country may, of course, be unwilling or unable to
   prosecute its own leaders. In such cases, an international tribunal,
   like the UN-backed Special Court for Sierra Leone, which is trying
   Charles Taylor (in a courtroom loaned from the International Criminal
   Court in The Hague), may step in. All five international tribunals set
   up over the past 15 years explicitly exclude immunity (or amnesty) for
   heads of state charged with war crimes or other atrocities. Mr Taylor
   is only the second serving head of state to be charged with war crimes
   after Slobodan Milosevic. Like Pinochet, the Serb tyrant escaped jail
   by death--in 2006.

   If no competent international tribunal can be found, a country
   unconnected with the case may decide to bring a prosecution in its
   national courts under the principle of "universal jurisdiction". This
   allows a country to try the perpetrator of a serious international
   crime even if neither he nor his victims are nationals and the crime
   has not been committed on its soil. At least eight European countries
   have adopted the principle. It was invoked by Britain in the Pinochet
   case, and also by Belgium to prosecute Mr Habré--until the African
   Union was shamed into asking Senegal, his country of exile, to try him
   instead.

   Exile, once the choice of many a deposed tyrant, no longer seems so
   safe. When Mr Taylor was handed over in 2006 to Sierra Leone's Special
   Court by Nigeria, where he had taken refuge in 2003, Libya's
   president, Muammar Qaddafi, noted nervously that a precedent had been
   set. "This means that every head of state could meet a similar fate,"
   he said. Quite so.

