
   The second article in our series looks at the new technologies for
   collecting personal information, and the dangers of abuse

   IT USED to be easy to tell whether you were in a free country or a
   dictatorship. In an old-time police state, the goons are everywhere,
   both in person and through a web of informers that penetrates every
   workplace, community and family. They glean whatever they can about
   your political views, if you are careless enough to express them in
   public, and your personal foibles. What they fail to pick up in the
   café or canteen, they learn by reading your letters or tapping your
   phone. The knowledge thus amassed is then stored on millions of
   yellowing pieces of paper, typed or handwritten; from an old-time
   dictator's viewpoint, exclusive access to these files is at least as
   powerful an instrument of fear as any torture chamber. Only when a
   regime falls will the files either be destroyed, or thrown open so
   people can see which of their friends was an informer.

                                                                       AP
                                                                       AP

                                 That old-time data: East Germany's files

   These days, data about people's whereabouts, purchases, behaviour and
   personal lives are gathered, stored and shared on a scale that no
   dictator of the old school ever thought possible. Most of the time,
   there is nothing obviously malign about this. Governments say they
   need to gather data to ward off terrorism or protect public health;
   corporations say they do it to deliver goods and services more
   efficiently. But the ubiquity of electronic data-gathering and
   processing--and above all, its acceptance by the public--is still
   astonishing, even compared with a decade ago. Nor is it confined to
   one region or political system.

   In China, even as economic freedom burgeons, millions of city-dwellers
   are being issued with obligatory high-tech "residency" cards. These
   hold details of their ethnicity, religion, educational background,
   police record and even reproductive history--a refinement of the
   identity papers used by communist regimes.

   Britain used to pride itself on respecting privacy more than most
   other democracies do. But there is not much objection among Britons as
   "talking" surveillance cameras, fitted with loudspeakers, are
   installed, enabling human monitors to shout rebukes at anyone spotted
   dropping litter, relieving themselves against a wall or engaging in
   other "anti-social" behaviour.

   Even smarter technology than that--the sort that has been designed to
   fight 21st century wars--is being used in the fight against crime,
   both petty and serious. In Britain, Italy and America, police are
   experimenting with the use of miniature remote-controlled drone
   aircraft, fitted with video cameras and infra-red night vision, to
   detect "suspicious" behaviour in crowds. Weighing no more than a bag
   of sugar and so quiet that it cannot be heard (or seen) when more than
   50 metres (150 feet) from the ground, the battery-operated UAV
   (unmanned aerial vehicle) can be flown even when out of sight by
   virtue of the images beamed back to a field operator equipped with
   special goggles. MW Power, the firm that distributes the technology in
   Britain, has plans to add a "smart water" spray that would be squirted
   at suspects, infusing their skin and clothes with genetic tags,
   enabling police to identify them later.

   Most of the time, the convenience of electronic technology, and the
   perceived need to fight the bad guys, seems to outweigh any worries
   about where it could lead. That is a recent development. On America's
   religious right, it was common in the late 1990s to hear dark warnings
   about the routine use of electronic barcodes in the retail trade: was
   this not reminiscent of the "mark of the beast" without which "no man
   might buy or sell", predicted in the final pages of the Bible? But
   today's technophobes, religious or otherwise, are having to get used
   to devices that they find even spookier.

   Take radio-frequency identification (RFID) microchips, long used to
   track goods and identify family pets; increasingly they are being
   implanted in human beings. Such implants are used to help American
   carers keep track of old people; to give employees access to
   high-security areas (in Mexico and Ohio); and even to give willing
   night-club patrons the chance to jump entry queues and dispense with
   cash at the bar (in Spain and the Netherlands). Some people want
   everyone to be implanted with RFIDs, as the answer to identity theft.

   Across the rich and not-so-rich world, electronic devices are already
   being used to keep tabs on ordinary citizens as never before.
   Closed-circuit television cameras (CCTV) with infra-red night vision
   peer down at citizens from street corners, and in banks, airports and
   shopping malls. Every time someone clicks on a web page, makes a phone
   call, uses a credit card, or checks in with a microchipped pass at
   work, that person leaves a data trail that can later be tracked. Every
   day, billions of bits of such personal data are stored, sifted,
   analysed, cross-referenced with other information and, in many cases,
   used to build up profiles to predict possible future behaviour.
   Sometimes this information is collected by governments; mostly it is
   gathered by companies, though in many cases they are obliged to make
   it available to law-enforcement agencies and other state bodies when
   asked.

   Follow the data

   The more data are collected and stored, the greater the potential for
   "data mining"--using mathematical formulas to sift through large sets
   of data to discover patterns and predict future behaviour. If the
   public had any strong concerns about the legitimacy of this process,
   many of them evaporated on September 11th 2001--when it became widely
   accepted that against a deadly and globally networked enemy, every
   stratagem was needed. Techniques for processing personal information,
   which might have raised eyebrows in the world before 2001, suddenly
   seemed indispensable.

   Two days after the attacks on New York and Washington, Frank Asher, a
   drug dealer turned technology entrepreneur, decided to examine the
   data amassed on 450m people by his private data-service company,
   Seisint, to see if he could identify possible terrorists. After giving
   each person a risk score based on name, religion, travel history,
   reading preferences and so on, Mr Asher came up with a list of 1,200
   "suspicious" individuals, which he handed to the FBI. Unknown to him,
   five of the terrorist hijackers were on his list.

   The FBI was impressed. Rebranded the Multistate Anti-Terrorism
   Information Exchange, or Matrix, Mr Asher's programme, now taken over
   by the FBI, could soon access 20 billion pieces of information, all of
   them churned and sorted and analysed to predict who might one day turn
   into a terrorist. A new version, called the System to Assess Risk, or
   STAR, has just been launched using information drawn from both private
   and public databases. As most of the data have already been disclosed
   to third parties--airline tickets, job records, car rentals and the
   like--they are not covered by the American constitution's Fourth
   Amendment, so no court warrant is required.

   In an age of global terror, when governments are desperately trying to
   pre-empt future attacks, such profiling has become a favourite tool.
   But although it can predict the behaviour of large groups, this
   technique is "incredibly inaccurate" when it comes to individuals,
   says Simon Wessely, a professor of psychiatry at King's College
   London. Bruce Schneier, an American security guru, agrees. Mining vast
   amounts of data for well-established behaviour patterns, such as
   credit-card fraud, works very well, he says. But it is
   "extraordinarily unreliable" when sniffing out terrorist plots, which
   are uncommon and rarely have a well-defined profile.

   By way of example, Mr Schneier points to the Automated Targeting
   System, operated by the American Customs and Border Protection, which
   assigns a terrorist risk-assessment score to anyone entering or
   leaving the United States. In 2005 some 431m people were processed.
   Assuming an unrealistically accurate model able to identify terrorists
   (and innocent people) with 99.9% accuracy, that means some 431,000
   false alarms annually, all of which presumably need checking. Given
   the unreliability of passenger data, the real number is likely to be
   far higher, he says.

   Those caught up in terrorist-profiling systems are not allowed to know
   their scores or challenge the data. Yet their profiles, which may be
   shared with federal, state and even foreign governments, could damage
   their chances of getting a state job, a student grant, a public
   contract or a visa. It could even prevent them from ever being able to
   fly again. Such mistakes are rife, as the unmistakable Senator "Ted"
   Kennedy found to his cost. In the space of a single month in 2004, he
   was prevented five times from getting on a flight because the name "T
   Kennedy" had been used by a suspected terrorist on a secret "no-fly"
   list.

   Watching everybody

   Another worry: whereas information on people used to be gathered
   selectively--following a suspect's car, for example--it is now
   gathered indiscriminately. The best example of such universal
   surveillance is the spread of CCTV cameras. With an estimated 5m CCTV
   cameras in public places, nearly one for every ten inhabitants,
   England and Wales are among the most closely scrutinised countries in
   the world--along with America which has an estimated 30m surveillance
   cameras, again one for every ten inhabitants. Every Briton can expect
   to be caught on camera on average some 300 times a day. Few seem to
   mind, despite research suggesting that CCTV does little to deter
   overall crime.

   In any case, says Britain's "NO2ID" movement, a lobby group that is
   resisting government plans to introduce identity cards, cameras are a
   less important issue than the emergence of a "database state" in which
   the personal records of every citizen are encoded and too easily
   accessible.

   Alongside fingerprints, DNA has also become an increasingly popular
   tool to help detect terrorists and solve crime. Here again Britain
   (minus Scotland) is a world leader, with the DNA samples of 4.1m
   individuals, representing 7% of the population, on its national
   database, set up in 1995. (Most other EU countries have no more than
   100,000 profiles on their DNA databases.) The British database
   includes samples from one in three black males and nearly 900,000
   juveniles between ten and 17--all tagged for life as possible
   criminals, since inclusion in the database indicates that someone has
   had a run-in with the law. This is because in Britain, DNA is taken
   from anyone arrested for a "recordable" offence--usually one carrying
   a custodial sentence, but including such peccadillos as begging or
   being drunk and disorderly. It is then stored for life, even if that
   person is never charged or is later acquitted. No other democracy does
   this.

   In America, the federal DNA databank holds 4.6m profiles, representing
   1.5% of the population. But nearly all are from convicted criminals.
   Since January 2006 the FBI has been permitted to take DNA samples on
   arrest, but these can be expunged, at the suspect's request, if no
   charges are brought or if he is later acquitted. Of some 40 states
   that have their own DNA databases, only California allows the
   permanent storage of samples of those charged, but later cleared. In
   Britain, where people cannot ask for samples to be removed from the
   database, it was recently proposed that the best way to prevent
   discrimination is therefore to include the whole population in the DNA
   database, plus all visitors to the country. Although this approach is
   commendably fair, it would be extremely expensive as well as an
   administrative nightmare.

   In popular culture, the use of DNA has become rather glamorous.
   Tabloids and television dramas tell stories of DNA being used by
   police to find kidnappers or exonerate convicts on death row.
   According to a poll carried out for a BBC "Panorama" programme this
   week, two-thirds of Britons would favour a new law requiring that
   everyone's DNA be stored. But DNA is less reliable as a
   crime-detection tool than most people think. Although it almost never
   provides a false "negative" reading, it can produce false "positives".
   Professor Allan Jamieson, director of the Forensic Institute in
   Glasgow, believes too much faith is placed in it. As he points out, a
   person can transfer DNA to a place, or weapon, that he (or she) has
   never seen or touched.

   Wiretapping is too easy

   More disturbing for most Americans are the greatly expanded powers the
   government has given itself over the past six years to spy on its
   citizens. Under the Patriot Act, rushed through after the 2001
   attacks, the intelligence services and the FBI can now oblige third
   parties--internet providers, libraries, phone companies, political
   parties and the like--to hand over an individual's personal data,
   without a court warrant or that person's knowledge, if they claim that
   the information is needed for "an authorised investigation" in
   connection with international terrorism. (Earlier this month, a
   federal court in New York held this to be unconstitutional.)

   Under the Patriot Act's "sneak and peek" provisions, a person's house
   or office can likewise now be searched without his knowledge or a
   prior court warrant. The act also expanded the administration's
   ability to intercept private e-mails and phone calls, though for this
   a court warrant was supposedly still needed. But in his capacity as
   wartime commander-in-chief, George Bush decided to ignore this
   requirement and set up his own secret "warrantless" eavesdropping
   programme.

   The outcry when this was revealed was deafening, and the programme was
   dropped. But in August Mr Bush signed into law an amendment to the
   1978 Foreign Intelligence Surveillance Act, allowing the warrantless
   intercept of phone calls and e-mails if at least one of the parties is
   "reasonably believed" to be outside America. So ordinary Americans
   will continue to be spied on without the need for warrants--but no one
   is protesting, because now it is legal.

   Where's your warrant?

   According to defenders of warrantless interception, requiring warrants
   for all government surveillance would dramatically limit the stream of
   foreign intelligence available. Privacy should not be elevated above
   all other concerns, they argue. But would it really impede
   law-enforcement that much if a judge was required to issue a warrant
   on each occasion? Technology makes wiretapping much easier than it
   used to be--too easy, perhaps--so requiring warrants would help to
   restore the balance, say privacy advocates.

   Britain has long permitted the "warrantless" eavesdropping of its
   citizens (only the home secretary's authorisation is required), and
   few people appear to mind. What does seem to worry people is the sheer
   volume of information now being kept on them and the degree to which
   it is being made accessible to an ever wider group of individuals and
   agencies. The government is now developing the world's first national
   children's database for every child under 18. The National Health
   Service database, already the biggest of its kind in Europe, will
   eventually hold the medical records of all 53m people in England and
   Wales.

   Even more controversial is Britain's National Identity Register, due
   to hold up to 49 different items on everyone living in the country.
   From 2009, everybody is to be issued with a "smart" biometric ID card,
   linked to the national register, which will be required for access to
   public services such as doctors' surgeries, unemployment offices,
   libraries and the like--leaving a new, readily traceable, electronic
   data-trail. America plans a similar system, with a string of personal
   data held on a new "smart" national driver's licence that would double
   up as an ID.

   Companies are also amassing huge amounts of data about people. Most
   people do not think about what information they are handing over when
   they use their credit or shop "loyalty" card, buy something online or
   sign up for a loan. Nor do they usually have much idea of the use to
   which such data are subsequently put. Not only do companies "mine"
   them to target their advertising more effectively, for example, but
   also to give their more valued (ie, higher-spending) customers better
   service. They may also "share" their data with the police--without the
   individual's consent or knowledge.

   Most democratic countries now have comprehensive data-protection
   and/or privacy laws, laying down strict rules for the collection,
   storage and use of personal data. There is also often a national
   information or privacy commissioner to police it all (though not in
   America). Intelligence agencies, and law-enforcement authorities often
   as well, are usually exempt from such data-protection laws whenever
   national security is involved. But such laws generally stipulate that
   the data be used only for a specific purpose, held no longer than
   necessary, kept accurate and up-to-date and protected from
   unauthorised prying.

   That all sounds great. But as a series of leaks in the past few years
   has shown, no data are ever really secure. Laptops containing
   sensitive data are stolen from cars, backup tapes go missing in
   transit and hackers can break into databases, even the Pentagon's.
   Then there are "insider attacks", in which people abuse the access
   they enjoy through their jobs. National Health Service workers in
   Britain were recently reported to have peeked at the intimate medical
   details of an unnamed celebrity. All of this can lead to invasions of
   privacy and identity theft. As the Surveillance Studies Network
   concludes in its recent report on the "surveillance society", drawn up
   for Britain's information commissioner, Richard Thomas, "The jury is
   out on whether privacy regulation...is not ineffective in the face of
   novel threats."

   Boiling the frog

   If the erosion of individual privacy began long before 2001, it has
   accelerated enormously since. And by no means always to bad effect:
   suicide-bombers, by their very nature, may not be deterred by a CCTV
   camera (even a talking one), but security wonks say many terrorist
   plots have been foiled, and lives saved, through increased
   eavesdropping, computer profiling and "sneak and peek" searches. But
   at what cost to civil liberties?

   Privacy is a modern "right". It is not even mentioned in the
   18th-century revolutionaries' list of demands. Indeed, it was not
   explicitly enshrined in international human-rights laws and treaties
   until after the second world war. Few people outside the
   civil-liberties community seem to be really worried about its loss
   now.

   That may be because electronic surveillance has not yet had a big
   impact on most people's lives, other than (usually) making it easier
   to deal with officialdom. But with the collection and centralisation
   of such vast amounts of data, the potential for abuse is huge and the
   safeguards paltry.

   Ross Anderson, a professor at Cambridge University in Britain, has
   compared the present situation to a "boiled frog"--which fails to jump
   out of the saucepan as the water gradually heats. If liberty is eroded
   slowly, people will get used to it. He added a caveat: it was possible
   the invasion of privacy would reach a critical mass and prompt a
   revolt.

   If there is not much sign of that in Western democracies, this may be
   because most people rightly or wrongly trust their own authorities to
   fight the good fight against terrorism, and avoid abusing the data
   they possess. The prospect is much scarier in countries like Russia
   and China, which have embraced capitalist technology and the
   information revolution without entirely exorcising the ethos of an
   authoritarian state where dissent, however peaceful, is closely
   monitored.

   On the face of things, the information age renders impossible an
   old-fashioned, file-collecting dictatorship, based on a state monopoly
   of communications. But imagine what sort of state may emerge as the
   best brains of a secret police force--a force whose house culture
   treats all dissent as dangerous--perfect the art of gathering and
   using information on massive computer banks, not yellowing paper.

