


   Using its power to ostracise and exclude, the Commonwealth has had
   sporadic success as a promoter of democracy; other clubs find it
   harder


   THERE are some global clubs that do hard business, like waging war or
   regulating trade. And there is another sort of club, with a large,
   ill-defined membership, and sensible goals but little power to correct
   wrongs except through peer pressure.

   In a cold, unsentimental world, the second type of club might seem
   doomed. Given that the consequences of being suspended, or even
   expelled, from such a group are rarely disastrous--the equivalent, at
   worst, of being shunned by one's schoolmates--they will surely not
   deter the planet's worst rogues.

   But those big, loose clubs somehow shuffle on--and world figures still
   devote time and energy to keeping them alive. Take the 53 member
   states of the Commonwealth, whose leaders will gather this weekend in
   Uganda's capital, Kampala. Advocates of this giant talking-shop say it
   got a new wind after the end of the cold war made propagating
   democracy and the rule of law more feasible, and necessary.

   "The special strength of the Commonwealth lies in the combination of
   the diversity of its members with their shared inheritance in
   language, culture, and the rule of law." So said the Harare
   Declaration, a 1991 document spelling out the values to which the
   Commonwealth members are supposed to adhere.

   Don McKinnon, a New Zealander who has served as secretary-general
   since 2000, insists that the organisation--with nearly 2 billion
   people (half Indian) in its domain--has done a decent job of holding
   governments to their declared values. As proof of its relevance to
   concrete problems, he cites its promotion of fair trading terms for
   poor-world farmers. Moreover, he points out, countries are still
   gagging to join. Having started as an ex-British club, it grew more
   elastic in 1995 when it admitted ex-Portuguese Mozambique and took in
   Cameroon, most of which was French.

   In Francophone (formerly Belgian) Rwanda, young enthusiasts have been
   learning cricket as a token of their country's keenness to join the
   Commonwealth. And in ex-Portuguese Timor-Leste, President José Ramos
   Horta has pledged that he too will apply. Neither of these bidders
   would have to leave the groups they already belong to: respectively la
   Francophonie (whose 53 members speak varying levels of French) and a
   community of eight Portuguese-speaking states. For tiny states with
   recent memories of horrific violence, the more clubs the better, it
   seems. Meanwhile Somaliland, the ex-British part of Somalia, wants to
   join the Commonwealth as part of a drive to secede from that country's
   war-torn south.

   If many countries want to join, that makes exclusion, or
   self-exclusion, somewhat more embarrassing. Fed up with being
   suspended, Zimbabwe's dictatorial leader, Robert Mugabe, stormed out
   of the Commonwealth in 2003. He said he didn't care--but it was an
   ugly spectacle.

   In the run-up to the Kampala summit, Commonwealth foreign ministers
   were considering whether to re-suspend Pakistan, one of several
   members whose relationship with the club has fluctuated sharply.
   (Another problem member is Fiji, whose latest suspension was decreed
   in December 2006.) The Commonwealth has a record not only of
   ostracising miscreants (not always with consistency) but also of
   readmitting repentant sinners.

   If it succeeds as a talking-shop, the reasons may be as much negative
   as positive. While some members liked the Soviet Union, none has ever
   been communist (bar Mozambique)--or experienced a total suppression of
   the separation of powers. And there are more subtle factors: veterans
   of Commonwealth summitry say the mix of informality and royal glamour
   is a heady experience for the leaders of small countries who rarely
   tread the world stage.

   None of the above plus points can be claimed by another idealistic and
   far-flung talking shop, one that extends from Vancouver to
   Vladivostok: the Organisation for Security and Co-operation in Europe,
   which comprises America, Canada, all of Europe and the ex-Soviet
   republics.

   As Queen Elizabeth, the head of the Commonwealth, packed her bags for
   Kampala, Spain's King Juan Carlos went to Vienna to laud the role of
   the OSCE (now under Spanish chairmanship) and hailed the 56-member
   group's labours in the service of "peace, prosperity and democracy".

   The OSCE has worthy aims. In places where the value of words like
   democracy and law has been debased, reinvesting them with meaning is a
   noble task. But it seemed easier in the euphoric days after the Soviet
   collapse, when almost every ex-communist state was vying to be a
   virtuous advocate of human rights.

   It was in that atmosphere that the OSCE, on just one occasion,
   mustered the unity needed to discipline a wayward member: Yugoslavia
   (by that time reduced to Serbia and Montenegro) was suspended in 1992,
   and only readmitted in 2000 after the fall of Slobodan Milosevic's
   tyranny.

   Since then, several ex-Soviet republics have become sceptical of the
   Western idea of human rights and multi-party democracy; but none of
   these awkward customers is ever likely to be suspended because
   unanimity would be needed. Russia's relations with the OSCE soured
   recently after the organisation dropped its plan to send observers to
   the forthcoming Russian election, on grounds that the Kremlin was
   limiting their numbers and holding up visas. At a meeting in Madrid
   next week, OSCE governments will consider awarding the body's rotating
   chairmanship to Kazakhstan: not the worst human-rights offender in the
   region but not a paragon of democracy either.

   If the Commonwealth half-works as a forum where miscreants can be
   shamed, that is because its members--in several ways--speak the same
   language. The OSCE's problem may be that words like freedom and
   democracy mean one thing in, say, Tashkent and another in Vienna.

