
   A report on how not to solve disputes

                                                                       AP

                                     AP

                 Clarkson: learning to avoid disintegration


   DID you ever hear about an Indian economist, a Ghanaian-American
   philosopher, a Chinese-Canadian stateswoman and a Northern Irish
   politician who tried to work out why so many groups of people were
   fighting each other and what could be done about it?

   Along with seven other public figures, the above
   luminaries--respectively Amartya Sen, Kwame Anthony Appiah, Adrienne
   Clarkson and (Lord) John Alderdice--have spent two years preparing a
   report[4]*; their formal remit was to consider "respect and
   understanding" as a way to stem conflict. The recipient of their
   collective wisdom will be the (formerly British) Commonwealth, whose
   heads of government, representing about 1.8 billion people, gather in
   Uganda later this month.

   At first glance, the fruits of this huge array of brain power look
   rather modest: a slim volume which, when opened randomly, seems packed
   with familiar political correctness and concessions to the idea of
   victimhood. People feel aggrieved because they are poor, powerless or
   else they belong to groups (ethnic, religious, economic) which are not
   sufficiently respected, and one grievance feeds another.

   But brevity is no sin--far from it--and amidst all this fluffy stuff
   are to be found some nuggets of very tough-minded thinking about the
   dangers of putting people into neat boxes--and the cynical way in
   which ethnic or tribal warlords or nationalist and religious zealots
   always try to shoehorn people into simple, unchanging categories
   because it suits their purposes and keeps conflict on the boil.

   Perhaps that much is obvious to anyone who has observed a peaceful
   society slide into conflict, or simply struggle to avoid
   disintegration on linguistic lines, as Canada has done. What is less
   obvious is that people who are trying to put an end to conflict--be
   they soldiers or nice peace-brokers--often fall into the same trap as
   the belligerents, by assuming that people naturally divide into simple
   categories.

   Instead of addressing, say, Protestants and Catholics and urging each
   "side" to think better of the other, it may be wiser to remind them
   that they have lots of other identities too: as parents, sports
   enthusiasts, believers in a political or economic ideology, music fans
   or whatever.

   As Mr Appiah, a novelist and New Yorker who descends from famous
   British and Ghanaian politicians, puts it: "When a cab driver asks
   where I am from, what he really wants to know is why I am
   brown-skinned, so I tell him I grew up in Ghana....But when I go to a
   philosophy conference, what matters is which school of philosophers I
   belong to."

   From these personal musings, Mr Appiah derives some quite stern
   conclusions about the way Western societies have responded to
   terrorists acting in the name of Islam. After the terrorist bombs in
   London of July 2005, he thinks, Tony Blair shouldn't have appealed for
   moderation among "British Muslims"; he should have addressed British
   citizens as a whole.

   Mr Sen, who was born in West Bengal in 1933, says he has been
   depressed by the way "Bangladeshi Muslim" identity has superseded all
   others--in contrast with 30 years ago when (in the early days of
   Bangladeshi independence) people of all religious backgrounds felt a
   Bengali solidarity that cut across religious affiliation.

   The existence of lots of competing affiliations which pull people in
   different ways is the best hope of silencing gloomy talk of a "clash
   of civilisations" (with religion, and Islam in particular, often seen
   as the defining characteristic for giant global blocks). Such thinking
   is "deeply flawed on a conceptual level and deeply divisive in
   practice," the report says.

   As everybody knows deep down, the authors suggest, people belong to
   lots of categories (family, language, personal interests, political
   ideology) and spend their time shifting between them--unless some
   conflict arises in which a detail of family history becomes a matter
   of life and death.

   At a minimum, say these authors, the authorities who are trying to
   keep inter-communal peace should not empower people whose authority
   depends on keeping divisions sharp. "It could be argued that, in
   Britain and America, attempts at engaging against terrorism...have
   had, at times, a perverse effect of magnifying the voice of extreme
   Islamists...faith-based approaches make it more difficult for
   politically secular Muslims to speak out against terrorism and
   violence," the report argues. If anybody reads it carefully, it will
   stir some interesting arguments when those Commonwealth leaders
   gather.
   [gray.gif]

   *[5]Civil Paths to Peace: Report of the Commonwealth Commission on
   Respect and Understanding

