
   The scale of an unspeakable horror

   FROM Bosnia's rape camps and the horrors of Rwanda's genocide in the
   1990s to the atrocities being perpetrated daily in northern Congo and
   Sudan's Darfur region, the tally of body bags runs alongside another
   grim body count: the numbers of women and girls, but in some places
   men and boys too, subjected to rape and other forms of sexual
   violence. Reliable and comprehensive figures are hard to come by:
   victims are often too traumatised or too fearful to speak out. But a
   report on "Sexual Violence in Armed Conflict" by the Geneva-based
   Centre for the Democratic Control of Armed Forces (DCAF) picks its way
   as systematically as it can through conflict after conflict, in
   Africa, the Americas, Asia, Europe and the Middle East, piecing
   together the evidence.

   It is grim reading. In Bosnia's war up to 50,000 women were subject to
   sexual violence; over 14 years perhaps 40% of Liberia's population
   suffered similar abuse; just under half those interviewed in a
   randomised study in Sierra Leone in 2000 had been raped, and more than
   a quarter had been gang-raped.

   Such sexual violence can lead to severe physical as well as
   psychological damage: high numbers of fistula cases have been reported
   during conflicts in Burundi, Chad, Congo, Rwanda, Sierra Leone,
   Liberia and elsewhere. An earlier DCAF report recorded that an
   estimated 70% of Rwanda's rape survivors were infected with HIV/AIDS.
   The offspring of such violence are often stigmatised or abandoned as
   "children of hate". In other words, the damaging health, economic and
   social consequences live on long after conflicts end.

   Can such violence be curbed? In Darfur, marauding militias prey on
   women and children collecting firewood, food or animal fodder outside
   refugee camps. In some places, African Union peacekeepers have sent
   out trucks with soldiers to follow the women and provide as much
   protection as they can.

   Alongside practical initiatives like these "firewood patrols", DCAF
   calls, as have earlier UN resolutions, for more women peacekeepers.
   They get along better with locals and also improve the behaviour of
   their male counterparts (in Congo in 2005 the UN registered 72
   allegations of sexual violence of one sort or another against its own
   troops; 20 were substantiated). The percentage of women serving in UN
   military and police units is tiny; but some women have recently had
   senior posts in UN missions. And earlier this year Liberia received
   the UN's first-ever all-female contingent--103 Indian policewomen. It
   would help, says DCAF, if victims of sexual violence were more
   involved and better cared for in programmes for disarmament and
   demobilisation.

   But when it comes to curbing sexual violence during conflict, ending a
   culture of impunity is key. The statute of the International Criminal
   Court allows for the prosecution of rape and similar violence as war
   crimes, crimes against humanity and even potentially as acts of
   genocide. Earlier this year the chief prosecutor decided to focus one
   of the court's investigations on atrocities carried out in 2002-03 in
   the Central African Republic--where rapes may have exceeded murders.

   The increasing use of rape, by governments as well as militias, as a
   weapon of war is to be the target of a UN General Assembly resolution
   that is expected to pass soon. After intense lobbying by Sudan (the
   resolution named no names, but evidently the shoe fitted) among the
   UN's Africa group, backed surprisingly by South Africa, the language
   of the resolution has been watered down somewhat. But it still calls
   for the UN secretary-general to report back next year on what is being
   done to protect civilians against sexual violence--and to hold to
   account, among others, governments that target their own citizens in
   this way.

