
   An economist with an unusual past

   THIRTY years ago China's leaders used to call the World Bank a tool of
   imperialism. Now China is one of the bank's top borrowers, and in
   December it became a donor, on a small scale.

   China may soon make a big contribution to the bank's intellectual
   ranks. According to whispers at the institution, its new chief
   economist will be a Chinese citizen. Justin Yifu Lin is the director
   of the China Centre for Economic Research at Peking University. He has
   twice won his country's top economic honour, the Sun Yefang award, and
   he has published in the leading journal of his profession, the
   American Economic Review. But this brilliant record masks an unlikely
   past. He was born not in China but in Taiwan. He defected to the
   mainland after serving in the Taiwanese armed forces.

   After earning a master's degree in political economy from Peking
   University, at a time when it was still steeped in Marxism, he earned
   an economics doctorate from the University of Chicago, where the
   market reigns. So his intellectual portfolio is perfectly hedged. That
   will serve him well in his new post. His adopted land has become an
   inspiration to many poor countries, especially in Africa. Their
   policymakers argue that China's path to prosperity defies and
   discredits the simple formulas propagated in Washington.

   Mr Lin is a student of China's economic reforms. But his scholarship,
   like his past, straddles ideological gaps. He believes governments go
   wrong when they defy the law of comparative advantage, promoting heavy
   industries in countries where capital is scarce and labour abundant.
   The government's first duty, he argues, is "to remove all possible
   obstacles for the function of free, open and competitive markets".
   Spoken like a Chicago man.

   But Mr Lin also says government has a second duty. As an economy
   develops, the state should coax firms into more sophisticated
   industries. This prodding may be needed for several reasons. To cite
   one: firms may not know which industries are viable, and which are
   not. So the government should subsidise pioneers who break a path for
   others.

   Washington's financial institutions were once notorious for their
   dogmatic prescriptions. Now they prefer piecemeal reforms and eclectic
   advice. That is a tide Mr Lin can probably swim with.

