
   More and more countries have doubts about the death penalty

   HOURS after being sentenced to death by a sharia court in Somalia last
   May, Omar Hussein was publicly executed. He was hooded, tied to a
   stake and stabbed to death by the 16-year-old son of the man he had
   admitted stabbing to death three months earlier.

   In Kuwait, a Sri Lankan was executed last year by hanging, or so the
   authorities thought. After the body was taken to the morgue, medical
   staff saw he was still moving. He was finally pronounced dead only
   five hours after the execution had begun. In Iran, a man and a woman
   were stoned to death for extra-marital sex.

   The horrors of cruelly administered, or botched, execution are not
   confined to developing countries or to lands that follow the letter of
   hudud, traditional Islamic punishment. In Florida last December, Angel
   Diaz was executed by lethal injection. The three-drug cocktail that is
   used by 37 American states is supposed first to induce
   unconsciousness, then to paralyse muscles and block breathing, and
   finally to stop the heart. But after the first injection, Diaz
   continued to move, squint and grimace as he tried to mouth words. A
   second dose was administered; only after 34 minutes was he declared
   dead. A post mortem showed the first needle had plunged through the
   intended vein, injecting the deadly chemicals into soft tissue
   instead. Two days later Governor Jeb Bush suspended executions in the
   state and set up a commission with a mandate to consider the humanity
   and constitutionality of lethal injections.

   According to Amnesty International's latest report, "at least"
   (precise figures are hard to get) 1,591 executions were carried out
   worldwide last year, well down on the previous year, but nearly 40%
   higher than in 2003. Yet Piers Bannister, the lobby group's
   death-penalty specialist, believes that the world is gradually inching
   its way towards abolition.

   That may sound wildly optimistic. But he says the important point is
   not the number of executions, which fluctuates from year to year, but
   the number of countries that carry out executions. This total has
   fallen steadily from 40 a decade ago to just 25 last year. Since 1985,
   55 countries have ended the death penalty or, having already limited
   it to "extraordinary" crimes (such as those committed in wartime),
   have now banned it outright.

   During the same period, only four states have reintroduced the death
   penalty. Two of them, Nepal and the Philippines, have since abolished
   it again; in the other two, the Gambia and Papua New Guinea, there
   have been no executions.

   Big swathes of the world have become execution-free: 89 countries have
   abolished the death penalty for all crimes, another ten for all but
   exceptional crimes, and a further 30 are abolitionist in practice,
   having executed nobody for at least a decade. Louise Arbour, the UN
   High Commissioner for Human Rights, has called for the complete
   abolition of the death penalty. In Europe, where abolition of capital
   punishment is a condition of membership of both the European Union and
   the 46-nation Council of Europe (of which Russia is a member), Belarus
   is the only country that still uses it. In Africa, only four countries
   carried out the death penalty last year. And in the Americas, the
   United States is the only country to have executed anybody since 2003.
   Only Asia and the Middle East seem largely untouched by the global
   movement away from the death penalty.

   Even China, the world's top executioner--which reports carrying out
   1,010 death sentences last year, though the real number may be nearer
   8,000--might be having second thoughts. Since January 1st all death
   sentences have had first to be approved by the Supreme People's
   Court--a practice that had been suspended after the launch of China's
   "strike hard" crackdown on crime in 2003, when publicly admitted
   executions soared to more than 7,000. In their annual report to
   parliament last month, representatives of China's chief legal bodies,
   including the Supreme People's Court, the public prosecutor's office
   and the ministries for justice and the police, urged a reduction in
   use of the death penalty (as well as torture).

   At a meeting of the UN Human Rights Council in Geneva last month, La
   Yifan, a Chinese delegate, went quite a lot further; he said he was
   "confident" that the application of the death penalty in China "will
   be finally abolished"--though this may prove to be window-dressing in
   the run-up to next year's Beijing Olympics.

   The method used for execution in China is already changing, with a
   gradual switch from firing squads to American-style injections. It was
   reported last year that China had deployed a fleet of "death
   vans"--vehicles equipped with the necessary equipment for lethal
   jabs--in order to make it easier for rural communities to dispose of
   criminals.

   Six countries--China, Iran, Pakistan, Iraq, Sudan and the United
   States--accounted for more than nine in ten of last year's known
   executions. Kuwait, which put just ten people to death last year, had
   the highest number of executions per head, followed by Iran. Iraq,
   where the death penalty was suspended after the American invasion in
   2003, showed the biggest proportionate leap in executions, up from
   just three in 2005. Desertion from the Iraqi army has been made
   punishable by death.

   Methods of execution vary widely. Since 2000, the condemned have been
   put to death by stoning (in Afghanistan and Iran), stabbing (in
   Somalia), beheading (in Saudi Arabia and Iraq), electrocution (in the
   American states of Virgina, South Carolina and Alabama), shooting (in
   China, Belarus, Somalia, Taiwan, and other countries), hanging (in
   Egypt, Iran, Japan, Jordan, Pakistan, Singapore and elsewhere), and
   lethal injection (in China, Guatemala, the Philippines, Thailand and
   America).

   Introduced in America in 1977 as a supposedly more humane alternative
   to other forms of capital punishment, lethal injection is now the
   preferred method in all but one of the 38 states that retain the death
   penalty. But its reliability and painlessness are increasingly being
   questioned. Eleven states have already suspended some or all of their
   executions while awaiting the outcome of more than 40 legal
   challenges, based on the constitution's ban on "cruel and unusual
   punishment". Given the number of contradictory rulings by the courts,
   the matter is bound to end up, sooner or later, in the Supreme Court.

   This week, as two more convicts were executed by lethal injection (in
   Ohio and Texas), a new report added fresh scientific evidence. An
   analysis of 41 executions by lethal injection in California and North
   Carolina since 1984 found that the three-drug cocktail can cause a
   slow and painful death from suffocation while leaving victims
   conscious, but unable to move or cry out. Furthermore, the last drug,
   designed to provoke massive cardiac arrest, does not always succeed in
   doing so, according to the Public Library of Science online journal,
   PLoS Medicine. 

   America is one of very few democracies (along with Japan, India, South
   Korea and Taiwan) still to have the death penalty. Abolitionists have
   been galvanised by findings that many innocent people--more than 120
   since 1973--were wrongly sentenced to death. Now questions over
   America's most popular method of execution are prompting some
   campaigners to ask, hopefully, whether this could be the beginning of
   the end of capital punishment. Some states, including New Jersey,
   Maryland, Montana and Nebraska, are already moving towards an outright
   ban. And if injections are outlawed, then a majority of Americans
   might prefer life imprisonment without parole rather than returning to
   the electric chair, firing squad or gas chamber. Indeed, there are
   opinion polls which suggest that half the electorate already feels
   that way.

