
   Rapid internet services are a boon. But not all regulators understand
   them

   IN ERAS past, economic success depended on creating networks that
   could shift people, merchandise and electric power as efficiently and
   as widely as possible. Today's equivalent is broadband: the high-speed
   internet service that has become as vital a tool for producers and
   distributors of goods as it is for people plugging into all the social
   and cultural opportunities offered by the web.

   Easy access to cheap, fast internet services has become a facilitator
   of economic growth and a measure of economic performance. No wonder,
   then, that statistics show a surge in broadband use, especially in
   places that are already prosperous. The OECD, a rich-country club,
   says the number of subscribers in its 30 members was 221m last June--a
   24% leap over a year earlier. But it is not always the most powerful
   economies that are most wired. In Denmark, the Netherlands and
   Switzerland, over 30% of inhabitants have broadband. In America, by
   contrast, the proportion is 22%, only slightly above the OECD average
   of just under 20%.

   In terms of speed, Japan leads the world. Its average advertised
   download speed is 95 megabits per second. France and Korea are ranked
   second and third, but are less than half as fast, and the median among
   OECD countries is not much more than a tenth. America's average speed
   is supposed to be a bit above the median, but most users find that it
   isn't, or that the faster speeds are vastly more expensive. A New
   Yorker who wants the same quality of broadband as a Parisian has to
   pay around $150 more per month.

   What accounts for the differences among rich countries? Two or three
   years ago demography was often cited: small, densely populated
   countries were easier to wire up than big, sparsely inhabited ones.
   But the leaders in broadband usage include Canada, where a tiny
   population is spread over a vast area. The best explanation, in fact,
   is that broadband thrives on a mix of competition and active
   regulation, to ensure an open contest.

   A lack of competition-boosting oversight is one reason for the poor
   record of the United States (and indeed for New Zealand, another
   unexpected laggard). Most Americans have a choice of only two
   broadband providers, either a telecoms or a cable operator. This
   virtual duopoly suits both sorts of provider, and neither has raced to
   offer its customers faster access. In some American states, prices
   have risen; in most other countries they have dropped.

   In theory, America's 1996 Telecoms Act obliged operators to rent out
   their lines to rivals; in practice, a regulatory decision and then a
   court ruling (in 2003 and 2004 respectively) have made it easy for
   operators to keep competitors out. The supposed aim of these decisions
   was to force new firms to build their own infrastructure, instead of
   piggybacking on facilities set up by older outfits. But new entrants
   have found it hard to join the fray.

   In any event, those American rulings may have been based on a faulty
   idea of how competition works in this area. As Taylor Reynolds, an
   OECD analyst, puts it, innovation usually comes in steps: newcomers
   first rent space on an existing network, to build up customers and
   income. Then they create new and better infrastructure, as and when
   they need it.

   In France, for example, the regulator forced France Télécom to rent
   out its lines. One small start-up firm benefited from this opportunity
   and then installed technology that was much faster than any of its
   rivals'. It won so many customers that other operators had to follow
   suit. In Canada, too, the regulator mandated line-sharing, and
   provinces subsidised trunk lines from which smaller operators could
   lease capacity to provide service.

   In South Korea, where half the population lives in flats, each block
   owns its own internal cabling and allows rival operators to put their
   equipment in the basement; each tenant then chooses which to use. In
   Japan, politicians put pressure on the dominant operator, NTT, to
   connect people's homes by high-speed fibre lines. And this week the
   communications ministry indicated that it will make NTT open those
   fibre connections to rivals.

   As broadband grows more popular, the political mood may change in many
   countries. At present, consumers are often misled by the speeds that
   operators promise to deliver. Soon regulators can expect to face
   pressure to ensure truth in advertising, as well as to promote easier
   access.

   Pressure will also come to correct another problem: most operators cap
   the amount of traffic users may send and receive each month, and
   nearly all provide far less speed for sending than for receiving. In
   other words, broadband doesn't really offer a two-way street. This
   will matter more as users turn into creators of content, from videos
   to blogs, and ask to be treated with due respect.

