
   The UN's new secretary-general is neither a dazzler nor a
   grandstander, but (at last) he has some things to show for his long
   hours and dogged phone calls

                                                                      AFP

                                    AFP


   ON DECEMBER 31st African Union troops in Darfur exchanged green berets
   for blue ones. That did not make their job of policing Sudan's
   war-wracked western region much easier, but it signalled the formal
   creation of what is set to be the world's biggest peacekeeping
   operation, with 26,000 personnel, under the joint aegis of the AU and
   the United Nations. A fortnight earlier, 187 countries at a UN
   conference in Bali, including China and the United States,
   unexpectedly agreed to begin talks on a global effort to save the
   planet from climate change.

   Apart from those two things, however, Ban Ki-moon would appear to have
   little else to claim for his first year as UN secretary-general. After
   years of headline-grabbing rows, divisions and scandals, the
   beleaguered world body suddenly seems to have gone quiet. No more bold
   plans for sweeping reforms; no more dazzling speeches, or grand
   visions for the organisation's future. Yet behind the scenes, without
   great fanfare, Mr Ban, although still far from a household name, is
   quietly getting things done.

   It has to be admitted that the UN's first Asian secretary-general in
   35 years got off to a poor start. A South Korean career diplomat, he
   knew little of the UN's complex culture, unlike his predecessor, Kofi
   Annan, who had spent his life working his way up through the
   organisation's ranks. Yet one of Mr Ban's first acts was to call for
   the resignation of all Mr Annan's senior advisers, replacing them with
   often inexperienced or even ill-qualified staff from outside the UN.
   His reliance on a coterie of compatriots provoked particular
   irritation.

   There followed a series of embarrassing gaffes from which better
   counsel might have saved him. On learning of Iraqi plans to execute
   Saddam Hussein, for example, he claimed that the death penalty was a
   matter for individual member states--apparently oblivious of the
   General Assembly's history of opposition to capital punishment. During
   a visit to east Jerusalem, he deeply offended Palestinians by
   declaring himself happy to be in Israel. And his early attempts to
   push through UN reforms without adequate consultation raised hackles
   as well as eyebrows, particularly among the developing nations.

   Furthermore, the low-key Mr Ban is not the natural showman that Mr
   Annan was. Smiling and polite, but rather bland in manner, he lacks
   the easy charm and dexterity with the English language that
   distinguished his predecessor. Matters have not been helped by some
   fairly disastrous appointments to his communications team. He is more
   of a doer than a communicator, he insists. Results are what count, not
   flowery phrases and rhetorical flourishes. Yet the latter can be
   useful, particularly when the former are still rather thin on the
   ground.

   In a speech summing up his first year in office, Mr Ban said that he
   had "not sat still". He had flown 125,000 miles, made 57 official
   visits to 39 countries and territories on six continents, held more
   than 300 bilateral meetings with government officials and spent 132
   days "on the road", he noted. But other than getting blue helmets into
   Darfur and helping to get climate-change talks started, what has he
   done?

   Nothing really spectacular, it is true. But that was not his aim. As
   Mr Ban announced before taking up his post, he wanted to concentrate
   on the many lofty goals that had already been set for the world body,
   rather than identify "new frontiers to conquer". In particular, he
   wanted to restore its excellence, integrity and pride by making it
   more efficient, more accountable and more relevant to the needs of all
   its 192 members, including the weightiest of all--the United
   States--without whose support the UN can do little.

   It is easy to forget the antipathy to the UN that existed in many
   American circles when Mr Ban first took over. Fury over the war in
   Iraq and the oil-for-food scandal had only recently died down; and
   many Republicans in particular still regarded the UN as an
   unnecessarily costly, disastrously managed, corruption-ridden obstacle
   to the free exercise of American policies in the world. There was even
   talk of scrapping the world body.

   A year later, the tone has changed markedly, both in Washington and at
   the organisation's headquarters in New York. The departure of both
   John Bolton, America's abrasive ambassador to the UN, and Mr Annan,
   who suffered in Washington from his alleged role in "preventing" UN
   approval for the invasion of Iraq (though that was a decision of the
   Security Council), has helped. So has the appointment of a new, more
   consensual American ambassador, Zalmay Khalilzad, who believes America
   needs friends to operate effectively in an increasingly globalised
   world.

   Eschewing his predecessor's bullying tactics and confrontational
   style, Mr Khalilzad has quickly earned a reputation as a shrewd
   operator. Well-liked and with a lot of charm, he has helped dissipate
   the huge distrust formerly felt towards America, particularly among
   developing countries. Far from wanting to weaken the UN, Mr Khalilzad
   says he wants it to become more involved in places like Afghanistan
   and Iraq (where he has served as ambassador), Darfur and Lebanon. Even
   George Bush is now talking of being committed to a "strong and
   vibrant" UN.

   Is this because America has found a secretary-general who is willing
   to do its bidding? The United States is certainly said to have wanted
   someone weak and pliable to replace the troublesome Mr Annan, and Mr
   Ban was its choice (and China's). But even initial critics admit that
   the inscrutable Korean is far from being an American patsy. Indeed, he
   has skilfully exploited his links with his two most powerful backers
   to push through extremely difficult agreements on both Darfur (opposed
   by China) and climate change (opposed by both China and America).

   Meanwhile, he has been pressing ahead with reforms to make the
   organisation more effective, transparent and honest. As of this week,
   the ethics code for 9,000 staff in the secretariat, established in the
   wake of the oil-for-food scandal, is being extended to all 60,000
   employees in the organisation's various semi-autonomous agencies and
   funds. Any body that does not set up its own ethics monitoring system
   will come under the secretariat's Ethics Office. And sanctions are
   real; just before Christmas, 11 staff found guilty of corruption were
   sacked.

   Mr Ban has also extended the work of the Procurement Task Force,
   likewise set up in the wake of the oil-for-food scandal, to
   investigate allegations of fraud in procurement deals. It has already
   exposed more than $600m in tainted UN contracts, mostly related to
   peacekeeping missions on which more than $5 billion is now spent every
   a year, and is investigating a further $1 billion in suspect deals.

                                                                      EPA
                                                                      EPA

                              Not just a stony face: after Algeria's bomb

   Meanwhile, under the expert guidance of Alicia Bárcena, Mr Annan's
   former chef de cabinet and one of the notable survivors of the former
   regime, a commendable start has been made on one of the UN's most
   sensitive and intractable problems--management reform. For the first
   time in the body's history, senior managers have been asked to detail
   all the mandates affecting their departments, some 9,000 in all, with
   a view to chopping or consolidating the thousands that are outdated,
   overlapping or no longer cost-effective.

   Mrs Bárcena has also launched a savage campaign against waste. She
   means to save mounds of paper, for example, by getting all the UN's
   present paper reports done electronically. As overseer of a planned $2
   billion renovation of the UN's 39-storey headquarters, she plans to
   save on acres of wasted office space. And she hopes to exploit the
   expected retirement over the next five years of nearly half the UN's
   managerial staff to achieve the almost impossible task at the world
   body of cutting posts and shifting staff to new jobs.

   Contrary to expectations, Mr Ban has also been surprisingly good on
   human-rights issues. Although he can do nothing about the disastrous
   new Human Rights Council, which was set up before he took over, he has
   been pressing ahead with the idea of an international "responsibility
   to protect" civilians from genocide and other atrocities when their
   own governments are unable or unwilling to do so.

   Following that principle's reluctant adoption by the UN summit of
   world leaders in 2005, it risked being still-born. But Mr Ban is now
   seeking to resuscitate it, pushing through the appointment of a
   full-time senior adviser on genocide and other atrocities along with a
   part-time adviser on the "responsibility to protect"--despite initial
   fierce opposition from Russia as well as many developing states who
   object to the violation of their sovereignty by do-gooding Westerners.
   All senior UN appointments have to be approved by a majority of the
   General Assembly.

   In recent weeks Mr Ban has shown that he is sensitive to individual
   tragedy as well as to atrocities on a larger scale. He was visibly
   overcome with emotion when comforting the families of 17 UN staff who
   were killed by a terrorist bomb in Algiers.

   A comeback kid

   After his first six months Mr Ban was widely being written off, in the
   words of one underling, as "mediocrity big-time". Thrown on to a world
   stage for which he was ill-prepared, he seemed destined to political
   oblivion. Despite his evident good intentions and commitment to the
   world body, some survivors from Mr Annan's reign became so
   disillusioned by his lacklustre performance that they thought of
   quitting. No longer.

   As Mr Ban himself admits, his learning curve was steep. He was
   initially overwhelmed by both the sheer size of his job and its lack
   of any real power other than persuasion. As a Korean, he was used to
   putting his job ahead of everything, even his family. But at the UN he
   found a very different culture. Here were 192 sovereign states, each
   apparently determined to put national interests before the common
   good. As a man of integrity, he had perhaps naively hoped to "lead by
   example". At the UN, that is often not possible.

   He has nevertheless won widespread respect. As many staffers and
   ambassadors have noted, what this seemingly grey man lacks in
   charisma, he makes up for in industry, a sharp mind and sheer
   tenacity. He gets on the phone and badgers world leaders relentlessly.
   That is how he got his breakthrough at Bali. That is how he convinced
   China to allow the UN flag to fly in Darfur. And he clearly hopes that
   his quiet doggedness can achieve quite a lot more before he leaves the
   East River.

