
                                                                    Alamy

                                   Alamy

   Money and effort aren't enough to impart the skills and knowledge
   needed in a cut-throat world

   SPOOKED by the effects of globalisation on their low-skilled citizens,
   rich countries have been pouring money and political energy into
   education. In the United States, it has been proclaimed that no child
   will be left behind. Whether this programme, launched by George Bush
   in 2002, has raised standards will be a big issue in the 2008
   presidential election. Next year Britain will introduce ambitious new
   qualifications, combining academic and vocational study. For the
   industrial countries of the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and
   Development (OECD), average spending on primary and secondary
   schooling rose by almost two-fifths in real terms between 1995 and
   2004.

   Oddly, this has had little measurable effect. The latest report from
   the OECD's Programme for International Student Assessment shows
   average attainment staying largely flat. This tome, just published,
   compares the reading, mathematical and scientific progress of 400,000
   15-year-olds in the 30 OECD countries and 27 others, covering 87% of
   the world economy. Its predecessors in 2000 and 2003 focused on
   reading and maths respectively. This time science took centre stage.

   At the top are some old stars: Finland as usual did best for all-round
   excellence, followed by South Korea (which did best in reading) and
   Hong Kong; Canada and Taiwan were strong but slightly patchier,
   followed by Australia and Japan. At the bottom, Mexico, still the
   weakest performer in the OECD, showed gains in maths; Chile did best
   in Latin America.

   There is bad news for the United States: average performance was poor
   by world standards. Its schools serve strong students only moderately
   well, and do downright poorly with the large numbers of weak students.
   A quarter of 15-year-olds do not even reach basic levels of scientific
   competence (against an OECD average of a fifth). According to Andreas
   Schleicher, the OECD's head of education research, Americans are only
   now realising the scale of the task they face. Some individual states
   would welcome a separate assessment.

   The results are unsettling for Britain, too. The country was excluded
   from the OECD's 2003 study because its sample of students was so poor.
   That, conveniently, disguised what is now apparent: that the excellent
   results of 2000, when the country came seventh in reading and well
   above average in both maths and science, were a statistical blip. This
   time Britain is way down the league in all three subjects. OECD
   analysts and British officials are highlighting the good news:
   immigrants do comparatively well, and 3% of British students put in
   top-ranking performances in science, as compared with only 1% across
   the OECD. "A fresh start," said OECD officials, diplomatically--but
   the results have embarrassed a government that claims to have put
   education at the top of its agenda for a decade.

   The improvement prize went to Poland, an also-ran in 2000. That
   reflects not increased spending, but successful reforms in 1999, which
   ended the practice of early selection on ability. By the second study,
   in 2003, the gains were already noticeable--and so marked that OECD
   statisticians cautioned privately that two data points do not make a
   trend, and decided to wait and see what happened next time. Further
   improvements have dispelled all doubts, making Poles the poster
   children for the proposition that early "tracking"--allocating pupils
   to different sorts of schools or programmes--hurts weak ones without
   benefiting the rest. "We have learnt that you can really make a change
   by bringing weaker performers into more demanding streams," says
   Barbara Ischinger, the OECD's director of education.

   Letting schools run themselves seems to boost a country's position in
   this high-stakes international tournament: giving school principals
   the power to control budgets, set incentives and decide whom to hire
   and how much to pay them. Publishing school results helps, too. More
   important than either, though, are high-quality teachers: a common
   factor among all the best performers is that teachers are drawn from
   the top ranks of graduates.

   Another common theme is that rising educational tides seem to lift all
   boats. In general--the United States and Britain may be
   exceptions--countries do well either by children of all abilities, or
   by none. Those where many do well are also those where few fall
   behind. A new feature in this year's study is an attempt to work out
   how differences between schools, as opposed to differences within
   them, determine performance (see chart). Variation between schools is
   big in Germany (to be expected, as most schools select children on
   ground of ability). But results also vary in some countries (like
   Japan) with nominally comprehensive systems. In top-performing
   Finland, by contrast, the differences between schools are nearly
   trivial.

                                                                    Alamy
                                                                    Alamy

                                              I'll show you how to be top

   And what can be done to ensure that budding scientists blossom? Give
   them teachers with excellent qualifications in science, spend plenty
   of time on the subject and engage their enthusiasm with after-school
   clubs, events and competitions, says the report. One does not need to
   understand string theory to grasp this, but doing the first two is
   hard. All science graduates, and physics graduates in particular, have
   a head start in other high-paid fields, such as financial services.
   And school curriculums are under constant pressure from meddlesome
   governments.

   The last recommendation--sparking children's interest in the subject
   with appealing science-based activities--comes with a caveat: a keen
   interest in science does not always mean being good at it. Half of all
   young Mexicans fail to reach basic levels of scientific literacy, but
   they value science more highly than their counterparts almost
   everywhere else. And across the world, the less students know about
   science, the more optimistic they are about the chances of solving the
   planet's environmental problems.

