
   One suitor has been chosen, but others are forcing their way into the
   church

   AT FIRST it proceeded at a glacial pace, but the sale of Northern Rock
   has now picked up unseemly haste. On November 25th Richard Branson's
   Virgin Group was chosen as preferred bidder for the stricken bank,
   which is kept alive only by public money. The Sunday decision caught
   many by surprise, not least rival bidders who were either due to
   present their bids to the bank and the government in coming days, or
   had done so that weekend and had no inkling that things would move so
   fast.

   Such haste at this late stage is unlikely to serve the interest of
   taxpayers, who have lent over £20 billion ($41 billion) to the
   mortgage lender since it came cap in hand to the Bank of England in
   September. That was the time for urgent action, and Alistair Darling,
   the chancellor of the exchequer, could have moved far faster to sort
   out the mess.

   Instead he allowed the wretched affair to drag on. The delay has
   strengthened the hand of investors, including some hedge funds that
   have been busily extending their stakes. They are now threatening to
   veto any takeover that they reckon undervalues the bank--an audacious
   proposition considering that Northern Rock would have folded but for
   the support of the public purse.

   Bryan Sanderson, the newly-appointed chairman of Northern Rock, says
   Virgin was chosen because it offered something to all
   "stakeholders"--which sounds rather worrying. Sir Richard has proposed
   putting £200m of his own money together with Virgin Money, his
   financial-services business, into Northern Rock. Half of the £1.3
   billion of cash he proposes to raise would come from current
   shareholders through a deeply discounted new rights issue. He also
   promised to pay off £11 billion of the central bank's loan
   immediately, and the rest within three years.

   Purely on its own merits, the bargain is a poor one for taxpayers, for
   their risk is barely diminished: as all bankers know, it is not the
   first but the last pound of a loan that is hard to get back. Even if
   the government gets a commercial interest rate, it is still assuming a
   risk that the private sector is patently shunning. When judged against
   competing bids, the deal looks even worse. A rival proposal from J.C.
   Flowers, an American private-equity firm, for example, promised to
   repay more of the Bank of England's loan at once.

   The sudden rush to advance Virgin's case is ill-advised, however
   tempting the political arguments might be for getting Northern Rock
   off the front pages. If taxpayers are to take their chances on a
   private-sector rescue, a proper auction makes more sense than a
   shotgun wedding. A threat by big investors to reject Virgin's offer is
   now forcing the government and Northern Rock's board to think again.
   Several bidders are battering at the church doors with offers that may
   prove better value for shareholders and taxpayers alike. They should
   be let in.

