
   Big price rises raise questions about how the market works

   HANGOVER at new year is in the grand tradition, but this year
   consumers' heads (and wallets) are hurting more than normal. On
   January 4th npower, a British electricity and gas firm owned by
   Germany's RWE, announced big increases in its household-energy
   tariffs. Electricity prices for its customers rose by an average of
   12.7%; natural-gas prices by 17.2%. The averages disguised a much
   wider range--rises for some customers were as high as 27%, supposedly
   because it costs more to transport gas to some parts of the country.
   Other suppliers are now muttering about price hikes of their own.

   Npower (and other energy firms) offer a simple explanation: gas is
   expensive because oil is expensive, driven by production difficulties,
   dwindling reserves and insatiable demand from the rapidly growing
   economies of India and China. Electricity prices, in turn, follow gas
   prices, because about 40% of Britain's power plants are gas-fired. Add
   in the rising cost of meeting energy-efficiency targets, and the
   increasing proportion of energy that must by law come from expensive
   renewable sources, and price rises are inevitable.

   But high oil prices may not be the whole story. Allan Asher, the head
   of Energywatch, a consumer watchdog, argues that the real problem is
   the malfunctioning of Britain's vaunted liberalised energy markets. He
   points out that the number of suppliers has dwindled from more than 20
   a decade ago to just six now, and that today's firms are vertically
   integrated to a great degree. Opaque markets and jealous incumbents
   make entering the domestic energy business difficult, and continental
   Europe's fondness for long-term contracts makes it hard for suppliers
   there to respond to price signals elsewhere. The result is volatility:
   even when British prices reach eye-watering levels (as happened in
   each of the previous two winters), gas imports do not increase to
   match, leading to factory closures and, in 2006, fears that
   residential customers might be cut off too.

   For many years ministers have assured the public that Britain's
   markets are working well, pointing to high levels of switching by
   customers and arguing that price is not the only measure of
   competitive performance. But on January 7th Alistair Darling, the
   chancellor, asked for a meeting with Ofgem, the energy regulator, to
   discuss whether consumer energy prices (which have risen steadily
   since 2003) have been responding properly to wholesale prices.

   Regardless of Mr Darling's concern, other official policies mean that
   energy prices are likely to remain high. The government is keen on
   expanding renewable energy and on building a new generation of
   nuclear-power plants to cut carbon emissions (see [3]article). But
   windmills and atomic reactors are expensive, and the only way they can
   compete with fossil fuels is through subsidies or higher energy prices
   that reflect the full cost of emitting carbon. Either way, consumers
   will foot the bills.

