
   Too much or not enough?

   WHAT will happen to global migration in the next half-century? Whether
   they think migration is good or bad, experts agree on one thing: that
   governments are generally failing, or not even trying, to manage it
   properly. Some would like to see the establishment of a new
   international body, along the lines of the World Trade Organisation,
   or give more powers to the UN's existing International Organisation
   for Migration. Others hope to decouple migration policy from party
   politics. In America, hostility to migrants has been making serious
   policy reform impossible for nearly two decades.

                                                                       AP

                                     AP

        Available now: young risk-takers, willing to travel, lots of
                               get-up-and-go

   "We can't touch a comma without killing each other," complains
   Demetrios Papademetriou of the Migration Policy Institute in
   Washington, DC. "The only discretion we have is whether to enforce the
   law or not." There is a lot of nasty rhetoric about illegal migrants,
   but politicians also lobby for cheap migrant workers in their
   constituencies.

   Those who think about the longer term agree that some of the
   assumptions of recent decades need revisiting. There is more
   scepticism, for example, that family reunification benefits host
   countries. But not many of them weigh up the most extreme scenarios:
   how would the world fare if either the flow of migrants were to slow
   down radically or, conversely, there were no legal limits on migration
   at all?

   Rates of migration might slow if countries were to slam their doors
   shut, or because the supply of migrants declines. If political
   pressure became strong enough, rich countries might decide to squeeze
   foreign labour whatever the economic price. That is what happened in
   America just before the first world war. Within a few years Congress,
   overturning a veto by President Woodrow Wilson, passed laws that
   sharply cut the inflow of migrants. Immigration slumped and stayed low
   until the 1960s. Other rich countries also slapped on restrictions.

   If something similar happened today, there might be some benefits. For
   example, it might become easier to integrate existing immigrant
   communities. Perhaps, as Japan appears to be hoping, more jobs could
   be carried out by machines. Possibly, ageing natives in rich countries
   might do more of the jobs that they now shun. Such countries would
   probably have to lower their expectations of economic growth.

   It is also possible that the steady supply of workers from nearby
   countries could one day dry up. Patterns of migration will certainly
   change. Note how quickly countries switch from exporting to importing
   labour as they develop. Until recently Spain and other parts of
   southern Europe were sending lots of workers abroad, but demographic
   and economic changes have made them into net labour importers.
   Portugal now attracts Ukrainians, Spain draws in Romanians and
   Moroccans.

   In the coming decades, the next lot of emigration countries will grow
   richer and older too. The average age in Ukraine is already 40 and in
   Poland 38, not very different from the west European average. Even
   Moroccans and Mexicans are, on average, already in their mid-20s. With
   rapid growth in their own economies, wages back home rise too, and the
   supply of emigrants will eventually drop. Those countries, in turn,
   will then start to attract more workers from farther away. For the
   foreseeable future there will always be another pool in which to fish
   for workers, but that will mean drawing migrants from more and more
   distant cultures.

   The other scenario, of a world wide open to migration, is less likely
   but would be more beneficial. Some regions--most of the EU, much of
   west Africa--do have unrestricted movement, and seem to be faring well
   with it.

   Philippe Legrain (formerly a writer on The Economist), in his recent
   book, "Immigrants: Your Country Needs Them", argues that stopping
   people from migrating is both "morally wrong and economically stupid".
   Lant Pritchett, of the Kennedy School of Government at Harvard, argues
   that faster global migration would bring huge gains for poor
   countries, exceeding the combined rewards offered by foreign aid, debt
   relief and trade reforms proposed under the Doha development round.

   How to make the world richer

   If labour flowed without restraint, social and political systems would
   be disrupted on a huge scale, but global poverty would be vastly
   relieved. A study in 1984 suggested that if the flow of labour were
   freed completely, the size of the world economy would double. Another
   study in 2003 more modestly put the gains to world GDP at nearly 10%.
   An estimate in 2004 of the impact of letting 16m more migrants into
   OECD economies suggested a global gain of $156 billion, or about 0.6%
   of world GDP--not a large rise, but again the poor would be winners.

   Opening borders to let many more job-seekers go where they please
   would be radical, but it would not mean allowing criminals,
   drug-smugglers or terrorists to move freely between countries. And
   there are many ways of doing it. Holger Kolb, a migration expert, has
   suggested allowing unlimited numbers of foreign workers into rich
   countries but charging them a fee on arrival. That would cut out the
   people-smugglers, and the revenues could help to pay for public
   services. Another option would be to charge foreign workers higher
   rates of tax than locals. Such ideas should be explored.

   The moral case for migration is incontrovertible: it greatly lessens
   human misery. The cultural gains from migrants are usually obvious,
   too. But the economic case needs to be made more forcefully. Over the
   past few decades the freer movement of capital and traded goods has
   brought enormous gains to human welfare. Similar benefits can be
   expected from a freer flow of people. Policymakers in rich countries
   must make those benefits more transparent. They need to persuade
   voters that natives and migrants alike gain as larger workforces speed
   up economic growth; and that foreigners not only fill jobs but act as
   entrepreneurs who in turn create jobs and wealth. In the longer term,
   migrants will be essential to supplement shrinking native workforces.
   The question currently being asked in the rich world--whether
   immigration rates are unsustainably high--may be the wrong one.
   Perhaps they are not nearly high enough.

