
   How far can Nick Clegg take the party he now leads?

                                                                      EPA
                                                                      EPA

                                                       Nick's close shave

   IF INDIFFERENCE is crueller than mockery, the Liberal Democrats, who
   elected a new leader, Nick Clegg, on December 18th, must be piqued.
   The nation hardly noticed the contest between the 40-year-old former
   home affairs spokesman and Chris Huhne, who held the environment
   brief, to replace Sir Menzies Campbell, who resigned in October. Even
   a tight finish (the winning margin was 511 votes out of 41,465 cast)
   was not enough to lend the announcement a sense of import.

   Yet the Lib Dems are an important party. They won 22% of votes cast in
   the 2005 general election, and have not slipped below 16% in any
   election since 1992. Britain's first-past-the-post electoral system
   gives them only 62 of Parliament's 646 MPs (hence their enthusiasm for
   proportional voting models), but that tally still represents a
   post-war peak for a third party at Westminster.

   The Lib Dems' ability to command such support partly explains why no
   party may be able to get an overall parliamentary majority at the next
   election. John Curtice, a psephologist at Strathclyde University,
   reckons that, all else being equal, a 20% share of the vote for the
   Liberal Democrats would leave the Tories needing to win by more than
   9% to govern alone.

   But the Lib Dems have struggled recently, falling to 12% in the polls
   under Sir Menzies. The plunge was attributed to his lacklustre
   leadership (he looked older than his 66 years), as well as strong
   performances first from Labour, after Gordon Brown took over in June,
   and then from the Conservatives after the prime minister ducked
   calling a general election. Coming just a year-and-a-half after their
   previous leadership contest--prompted by the resignation of Charles
   Kennedy over confessed drink problems--Sir Menzies's departure made
   the Lib Dems look divided and inconsequential.

   Yet there are signs of recovery in the polls, for which Mr Clegg can
   thank not only the government's woes but also Vince Cable, the
   treasury spokesman who served as an interim leader. Aged 64, he did
   not take part in the contest, but his intellect and wit--he mocked the
   transformation of Mr Brown "from Stalin to Mr Bean"--have made many
   wish he had.

   Confidence in Mr Clegg's ability to build on Mr Cable's stewardship
   has cooled. His campaign did not show the vigour needed to win media
   coverage for a third party. But he has youth and charisma on his side.
   That he embodies his party's classical liberal wing--rather than the
   social-democratic one that Mr Huhne pitched to--will also help in the
   many constituencies it is defending from the Tories.

   If a hung parliament does materialise, the Lib Dems could be
   king-makers--entering a coalition government with either of the main
   parties. The Tories already appear to be courting them. On December
   15th David Cameron, the Conservative leader, invited them to
   co-operate with his party on decentralisation. For Mr Cameron to be
   wooing a party unpopular with his own suggests he knows how limited
   his options may be after the next election.

   The Lib Dems, though, are rarely smug about the pivotal role they
   could play at that point. And with reason: they have reached nothing
   approaching a consensus on which of the two main parties they would
   prefer as partners, or whether coalition would be acceptable at all.
   The party's activists are to the left of its leadership and would
   struggle to accept a deal with the Tories. Yet propping up a tired
   Labour government they regard as indifferent to civil liberties and
   the environment would be scarcely more palatable.

   Burdens as well as opportunities, then, for Mr Clegg. The attention
   his victory received was modest; the influence he may come to wield is
   anything but.

