
   Equality for low-paid women means some will lose their jobs

   IT IS not just teachers' pay that is putting pressure on school
   budgets as government largesse runs out. An attempted raid on school
   reserves in the name of sexual equality could make things worse. For
   years councils have paid cleaners, dinner ladies and teaching
   assistants less than men for jobs that are now regarded as requiring
   similar skills. That will no longer be possible.

   The saga started in 1997, when local councils thrashed out an
   agreement with unions to review wages and start paying workers in
   female-dominated jobs as much as those in male-dominated ones. (School
   cleaners, for example, mostly women, have long earned less than street
   cleaners, who are mostly men.) The process was supposed to have been
   finished by mid-2007, but fewer than half of all councils had
   completed even their reviews by the year's end.

   Some 700,000 local-government workers have probably been treated
   unfairly. Closing the gap in wages and reaching some agreement about
   the six years of back pay to which women may be entitled will cost
   councils at least £3 billion, says the Local Government Association.
   The bill could be even higher if it proves impossible to negotiate
   union-wide deals. Large numbers of women might then go to employment
   tribunals: 50,000 cases are waiting to be heard.

   The battle has pitched union sisters against their brothers. Some of
   the latter will see their pay reduced to match that of women doing
   comparable jobs. One group of women has already taken their union to a
   tribunal, alleging that a desire to protect men's jobs and pay led it
   to pull its punches in talks with councils. They lost, but no-win,
   no-fee lawyers are touting for more such business.

   Other natural alliances have also frayed. On January 14th the Equality
   and Human Rights Commission withdrew its support for another set of
   women who want the council they work for to equalise pay right away,
   rather than protecting men's pay and closing the gap gradually.
   Further support for their case would be "throwing petrol on this legal
   forest fire", says the commission's boss, Trevor Phillips.

   Whitehall has washed its hands of the problem. It has allowed councils
   to borrow more than normal to help them pay, although nowhere near
   enough to cover the bill. So, noting that schools employ around 30% of
   the staff in line for compensation, councils are eyeing schools'
   reserves covetously. Head teachers are outraged. Most reserves are
   earmarked for refurbishments, they say, and it was councils, not
   schools, that set the discriminatory pay rates.

   With teachers' pay protected by national agreements and a legal
   requirement to put a trained teacher in front of every class, other
   staff will have to bear the brunt of school funding cuts. Some
   low-paid women may get their compensation along with their redundancy
   notices. And if the number of teaching assistants plummets, so too
   will any hope for education that is truly "personalised" to suit each
   child.

