
   British troops look for a face-saving way out of Iraq

                                                                      AFP
                                                                      AFP

                                         Ready or not, they are in charge

   "I HATE Iraq. I wish we had never gone to the place," said Winston
   Churchill in 1926 when, as chancellor of the exchequer, he had to pay
   the cost of holding on to the violently rebellious territory. The
   British government, and much of the public, no doubt feels the same
   about today's military venture in Iraq, which has cost around £5
   billion ($10 billion) and the lives of more than 170 soldiers since
   2003.

   Having entered the country uninvited, the army is leaving unlamented.
   The handover ceremony in the departure lounge of Basra airport
   (Britain's last base) on December 16th, when Basra province was
   transferred to Iraqi security control, summed it up: the British are
   no longer safe in the city, and have booked their tickets out of the
   country.

   It was very different in the early days of the occupation of southern
   Iraq when British soldiers patrolled in soft berets, in contrast with
   the Americans in Baghdad. But as Iraq's violence spread southwards,
   and Basra turned into an urban shooting gallery, British troops also
   had to don their helmets and drive in armoured vehicles.

   Their battle now is to try to avoid the perception of defeat.
   Commanders claim that security has improved enough in Basra for Iraqi
   forces to take charge. Attacks against British forces have declined,
   but that is largely because of a shortage of targets after British
   troops withdrew from the city centre to the airport in September. A
   six-month ceasefire declared by Muqtada al-Sadr, the powerful radical
   cleric, has helped to reduce violence.

   For Iraqis, though, Basra remains a violent place, with scores of
   people killed every month. Major-General Jalil Khalaf, the police
   chief, complained of being left in a sea of troubles. Rival Shia
   militias with murky links to Iran compete violently for control and
   terrorise the population--particularly women deemed immodest, barbers
   and those selling alcohol.

   For the moment there are no open battles. That is good enough for
   Britain to accelerate its withdrawal, drawing the number of troops
   down from 4,500 to 2,500 next spring. A recent report from MPs asked
   whether such a small contingent could do anything more than defend
   itself. All British troops, except special forces and aircraft
   supporting the Americans, will probably be out of Iraq by the end of
   2008.

   The British army's ability to wage irregular warfare has been found
   wanting, despite the folk memory of centuries of colonial policing and
   decades in Northern Ireland. It would be a mistake, some generals say,
   for commanders to believe the convenient fiction of their success and
   assume they have nothing to learn.

   Confronted with rising violence, the Americans adopted a new
   counter-insurgency doctrine and reinforced their forces. American
   units now deploy for 15 months, compared with six months for the
   British. Conditions in Basra and Baghdad are different, say British
   officials. But the more important difference may be the mindsets in
   London and Washington; the British accepted that events were beyond
   their control, whereas the Americans acted to regain the initiative.

   The Pentagon is worried about the prospect of a vacuum in southern
   Iraq, through which its supply convoys from Kuwait must pass. However,
   the gap between the allies may narrow as America's "surge" in Iraq
   ebbs away. American commanders may also declare victory and withdraw,
   at least from some outlying provinces.

   Britain's departure is hardly graceful, but it would come as little
   surprise to Churchill. It was he, after all, who said that staying in
   Iraq was like "living on an ungrateful volcano".

