
                                                             Steve OBrien

                                Steve OBrien

   Why an online petition has caused trouble for the government on two
   fronts

   IN POLITICS, as in life, good intentions are not enough. In pursuit of
   two perfectly decent ideas--the need to tackle traffic congestion by
   some form of road pricing and the desire to make itself appear more
   open to consultation--the government has created nothing but trouble
   for itself.

   The immediate cause is an "e-petition" on the 10 Downing Street
   [3]website that by midweek had attracted nearly 1.5m signatures. The
   petition demands that the government abandon proposals to establish a
   national vehicle-tracking system that would be used to tax motorists
   every time they drove their cars. Through exaggeration and distortion
   the petition has rather brilliantly united the motoring, anti-tax and
   civil-liberties lobbies.

   When the deadline for signing the petition is reached on February
   20th, it will be politely rejected--Tony Blair has said he will send
   an e-mail to every signatory--and the newspapers which helped drum up
   support for it will rant about the government's arrogant disdain for
   public opinion. But two good causes, doing something to unclog
   Britain's overcrowded roads and experimenting with new forms of
   participatory democracy, will both have been set back unless some
   lessons are learned.

   First, the government needs to acknowledge that its attempts to sell
   road pricing have been pretty woeful. Its first mistake was to attach
   too much significance to Ken Livingstone's introduction of congestion
   charging in part of central London. Having implemented the scheme in
   the teeth of local opposition and government scepticism, Mr
   Livingstone secured his re-election as London's mayor when traffic
   initially flowed better and bus services were improved with the money
   raised. Mr Blair, no mean Livingstone-hater in the past, was dewy-eyed
   with admiration.

   Unfortunately, on the eve of the charging zone's extension westward,
   doubts about how much it has achieved are growing. This week Transport
   for London, the mayor's own transport body, was forced to admit that
   congestion is only 8% lower than it was before the charge was
   introduced. TfL thinks the extension is likely to make things even
   worse because of residents' discounts within the expanded zone. The
   government also conveniently forgot that Londoners rely far less on
   their cars than people elsewhere in the country and those who use them
   regularly tend to be richer.

   Among the government's other mistakes was failing to counter the
   impression that it wanted to set up a national surveillance network to
   monitor every driver and that many people who depended on their cars
   would literally be taxed out of them. Nor has the disappearance into
   the Treasury maw of the revenues from this month's doubling of
   air-passenger duty helped. It only confirmed suspicions that the
   government would use any excuse to dig its hand deeper into the
   public's wallet.

   The attempt to portray itself as a "listening" government has been
   equally inept. Much of the Downing Street website is informative and
   serious. But online petitions of the kind the site has invited since
   last November are neither. Indeed, petitions are one of the worst
   possible ways of drawing the public into the political process. By
   their nature, they encourage single-issue campaigners and a crudely
   binary approach to complex issues which require the reconciliation of
   contradictory interests.

   The road-pricing petition tells us that many people want neither to
   pay more for driving nor to feel they are being spied on when they use
   their cars, and that lots of them are willing to spend one minute
   protesting about it. What the petition doesn't do is provide any clue
   as to how journey times should be speeded up to the benefit of both
   individuals and the economy.

   The problem is that although everyone seems to agree there is a
   "crisis of disengagement" from politics--as shown by low voter turnout
   and fading identification with political parties--convincing solutions
   are in short supply. The government is sponsoring "Digital Dialogues",
   an investigation by the independent Hansard Society into ways in which
   the internet can be used to consult voters and "internal stakeholders"
   over aspects of government policy. Last year, however, a report on
   declining political engagement, dubbed the Power inquiry, recognised
   that "popular cynicism towards public consultation is very strong",
   though it gamely argued that all public bodies should nonetheless
   consult the public in their decision-making.

   One possible answer is to cultivate more direct forms of
   participation. The Power inquiry teamed up with a London council to
   give local residents a direct role in setting the following year's
   budget. The "open-budget" assembly in Harrow attracted about 300
   participants to six hours of deliberation on a Sunday afternoon.
   Nearly everyone involved thought the event a success, but the kind of
   people who will give up part of their weekend to debating how much
   money should be spent on collecting rubbish are probably pretty
   engaged in the first place.

   Local will do for now

   Another recommendation by the Power inquiry, taken up this week by a
   rightish think-tank, the Centre for Policy Studies, is that ordinary
   Britons should have the same right to initiate legislation through
   referendums as citizens in 24 American states and many European
   countries, most famously Switzerland. David Cameron, the Tory leader,
   is said to be interested and the chancellor, Gordon Brown, who wants
   to show he is not the top-down micro-manager depicted by his enemies,
   could be too.

   Whether such alien notions can be transplanted to Britain is
   questionable. But what is most wrong with the British version of
   representative democracy is its extreme over-centralisation. What
   other country would even be thinking about a "national" road-pricing
   scheme? Never mind direct democracy: most Britons would probably be
   happy with just a little more democracy that was genuinely local.

