
   Trade is booming--and busting up families

   THE discreet sign and dimly-lit staircase are not promising; nor is
   the silence that greets your correspondent when he interrupts a dozen
   Somali men to ask if this is the place to buy qat. But around the
   back, along a terrace and up another flight of stairs, sits a happy
   circle of youths, surrounded by discarded plant stems and beaming
   deliriously.

   This is a mafresh, where people come to chew the leaves of Catha
   edulis, a celebrated east African shrub with narcotic properties
   similar to amphetamine. The leaves, known as qat, contain the
   stimulants cathinone and cathine, rendering them illegal in America,
   Canada and most of Europe.

   Not so in Britain, which treats the plant as a harmless vegetable and
   allows its unrestricted import, export and sale. This is good news for
   the country's Somali, Yemeni and Ethiopian population, all regular
   chompers (a third of all Somali adults indulge). Demand from these
   communities has created a supply chain bringing bundles of stems from
   Africa to Britain, wrapped in banana leaves to keep them fresh. Their
   potency declines from the moment of harvest, so suppliers pull out all
   the stops to get their product into Britain's mafreshi within 24
   hours.

   The scale of the operation is breathtaking. A Home Office report in
   2005 found that up to seven tonnes of qat is imported into Britain
   every day, mainly from Kenya. A 150-gram portion--a single dose--can
   be bought for £3, which suggests that the British market is worth some
   £51m a year for 17m hits.

   Given that the target community numbers fewer than 200,000 (including
   a lot of children), this is a suspiciously large amount. The
   government reckons much of the stock is for export to markets where it
   is illegal--especially America, where a £3 British bundle can fetch
   ten times that much. Many would-be smugglers are intercepted there at
   customs, but Britain's soft line means they face no punishment when
   sent home.

   Somali women in Britain have long backed a ban, sick of seeing their
   husbands buzz all night and snooze all day. A survey by Nacro, a
   crime-reduction charity, found 57% of Somali women thought qat chewers
   made bad fathers. "My brother does not hold on to jobs because he is
   up all night chewing," was one typical response. In the same survey,
   two-thirds of users admitted they had trouble sleeping and half felt
   tired or depressed the morning after a session.

   Despite this, the government last year approved a report recommending
   that the drug remain legal. Prohibition would raise its price, it was
   argued, causing organised criminals to move in and wrench the market
   from local businesses. In any case, the report noted reassuringly, the
   scourge was limited to Somalis and Yemenis, and there was "no evidence
   of qat use in the general population". No need to worry then.

