
   Telecommunications: The idea of sending information through the air in
   the form of flashes of light is being given a high-tech makeover

                                                                    Alamy

                                   Alamy

   WHEN most people switch on a desk lamp, they usually want a little
   extra illumination. But not John Goodey, an engineering student at
   Oxford University. When he flicks the switch and turns on his lamp, a
   sensor on his desk downloads music tracks digitally encoded within
   tiny flickers in the lamp's light. The music is then relayed through a
   pair of nearby speakers. This unusual set-up offers a glimpse of a
   future in which light, rather than radio waves, is used to send
   information. The concept, known as optical wireless or free-space
   optics (FSO), promises better security and higher data-transfer rates
   (up to 10 gigabits per second) than existing radio-based
   communications technologies, says Dominic O'Brien, a leading engineer
   in the field and Mr Goodey's research supervisor at Oxford.

   FSO is already used in a few niches: to connect networks in nearby
   offices without having to string cables between them, for example. But
   plans are afoot to extend the idea into a number of new areas. For
   example, the subtle flickering of car headlights and tail-lights could
   be used to transmit speed and braking information to other vehicles,
   to help prevent collisions. Traffic lights could alert cars when they
   are about to change, or broadcast the latest congestion update to
   waiting vehicles. In the home, FSO could be used together with
   interior lighting to provide extremely fast internet downloads. Since
   light does not travel through walls, there would be no need to worry
   about neighbours snooping on your e-mail, or piggybacking on your
   broadband connection.

   Futuristic though this sounds, FSO is by no means a new idea. Soldiers
   in ancient Greece used polished shields to send battle orders to each
   other over vast distances in the form of flashes of sunlight. More
   recently, so-called "heliographs" have been used to relay military
   signals in a similar way. And it is only in the past ten years that
   the British navy has phased out its use of Aldis lamps to convey Morse
   code signals from ship to ship. Yet just as this old analogue
   technology was being retired, its new digital counterpart was making
   its debut. In the past few years a small number of companies, such as
   Terabeam, LightPointe and Cablefree Solutions, began offering
   businesses point-to-point optical systems that could send data between
   buildings.

   These early optical systems were capable of sending information at a
   rate of hundreds of megabits per second (Mbps), but customers usually
   wanted only about 10Mbps, says Stephen Patrick of Cablefree. Back then
   the attraction was not speed but convenience, he says. Advocates of
   FSO like to say it has the speed of a fibre-optic link, and the
   convenience of a wireless link. It is easy to set up: simply hook up
   infra-red laser transceivers on top of two buildings and then align
   them. "The cost to install is very low," says Mr Patrick.

   There is no messing about with radio-spectrum licences or digging up
   roads, and FSO can also bypass prohibitive planning restrictions. In
   places where transmitters are not allowed on roofs, for example,
   indoor FSO transceivers can simply send and receive data through
   closed windows. FSO is also secure: the only way to intercept the
   signal is physically to intercept the beam.

   As a result, hundreds of businesses, hospitals and universities are
   already using FSO. City skylines are not criss-crossed with grids of
   laser beams because it is all done using invisible infra-red light,
   says Mr O'Brien. Today's technology can transmit data up to 4km (2.5
   miles) at speeds of 1-3 gigabits per second (Gbps).

   Telecoms operators are starting to take an interest in the technology
   as an alternative to the microwave-radio "backhaul" links that are
   used to link mobile-phone base-stations to operators' core networks.
   FSO's main drawback is that bad weather, such as rain or fog, can
   interrupt the signal. But Mr Patrick notes that microwave links are
   also prone to atmospheric interference. Provided FSO is set up over
   relatively short distances--say several hundred metres--it is a
   reliable technology, he says.

   There is no need to worry about bad weather when using FSO indoors, of
   course. But maintaining a line of sight can be a problem for a laptop
   that is being carried around within a home or office. One solution is
   to use a diffuse light source rather than a laser beam, says Mr
   O'Brien. Using the natural reflectivity of ceilings and walls, a
   transmitted infra-red signal can be received by any number of
   receivers within a room. But this approach reduces the pace at which
   information can be transferred. "Most of the light doesn't go where
   you want it to," says Mr O'Brien. Nor is it possible simply to crank
   up the power of the source beam, because infra-red light at high
   intensity can cause eye damage.

   So Mr O'Brien has been working on a ceiling-based system that tracks
   where a receiving device is, and then sends it a signal using several
   laser beams from a directional transmitter. He has built a prototype
   that runs at 300Mbps, nearly six times faster than today's typical
   Wi-Fi links and reckons that speeds of up to 10 Gbps are feasible.
   That is not to say that Wi-Fi is obsolete. Instead, the two
   technologies may end up being used together: Wi-Fi as the uplink, and
   FSO for the much faster downlink.

   The long-term hope is to transmit data using visible light emitted by
   indoor lighting. In Japan the Visible Light Communications Consortium,
   made up of industrial giants such as Sony, Toshiba and NEC, is
   pursuing just that goal. FSO is not possible with existing indoor
   lighting because incandescent bulbs cannot switch on and off fast
   enough. But that is not a problem for white light-emitting diodes
   (LEDs), which are expected to become far more widespread in the coming
   years, because they use less energy and are more versatile than
   incandescent bulbs. The combination of LEDs and FSOcould then be used
   to provide internet coverage throughout a home or office. Could it be
   lights out for radio networking?

