
   Britain's immigration regime, long one of Europe's most liberal, is to
   tighten up. Will it secure the jobs of British workers--or those of
   MPs?

                                                           Report Digital

                               Report Digital


   DURING dull moments in the office, British workers may while away the
   time looking at the website of Australia's immigration department and
   daydreaming about life down under. Every two years the agency updates
   its list of the skills the country wants to import: if yours comes up,
   and you are suitably young and qualified, you may be awarded enough
   points for a passport to warmer climes.

   From March, Britain's government will begin to roll out its own
   "Australian-style" points-based immigration system for workers from
   outside the European Union, looking at education, earnings, age,
   command of English and other factors. One reason is to simplify
   matters: the new system will replace more than 80 different ways of
   coming to work in Britain with five tiers. Another reason, ministers
   say, is to make sure that Britain receives only the migrant workers it
   needs. Alongside a battery of other recently announced changes--from
   citizenship tests through higher age limits for foreign brides to a
   new border police force--the points system is the centrepiece of what
   the government calls the biggest ever change to Britain's immigration
   system.

   They dub it thus with one eye on the polls, for immigration is voters'
   single biggest worry these days. In November a survey by Ipsos MORI
   found 72% of people unhappy with the government's handling of the
   matter. Immigration is seldom off the agenda in any country, as our
   [4]special report this week makes clear, but things are especially
   acute in Britain. With immigration running at its highest rate in
   decades, 68% of people say they think "there are too many immigrants
   in Britain"--the highest proportion in almost 20 years--though 48%
   still believe "immigration is generally good for Britain". Local
   councils complain of inadequate resources to deal with newcomers. Home
   Office gaffes, the repeatedly revealed inadequacies of official
   statistics and underlying fear of Islamist terrorism all stoke unease.

   As Britain's economy predictably cools, the argument over immigration
   will come down increasingly to the question of jobs. No one disputes
   that immigrants have spurred economic growth, though it is less clear
   that they have boosted growth per person. The recent wave of Poles,
   Lithuanians and others from new members of the European Union--mainly
   young, white, healthy and willing to tackle hard-to-fill jobs from
   plumbing to care work--have blended in more easily than most. Danny
   Sriskandarajah of the Institute for Public Policy Research, a
   think-tank, points out that foreign workers have generally been
   drafted in only when the domestic labour market has been tight (see
   chart).

   Yet there is evidence that migrant workers have exerted downward
   pressure on wages in some low-skilled sectors. And in an economy where
   a stubbornly high proportion of young people are not in education,
   work or training, easily employable foreign workers can seem a menace.
   Gordon Brown, the prime minister, recently promised more "British jobs
   for British workers", only to be embarrassed by the subsequent
   revelation that 1.5m of the 2.7m new jobs created in Britain over the
   past ten years had gone to foreign workers.

   The government's vaunted new toughness on immigration is an attempt to
   convince the public that it can prevent migrants from edging young
   Britons out of their own labour market. Yet according to John Salt of
   University College, London, fewer than 40% of migrant workers will be
   covered by the new points regime. Those from the EU--with the
   exception of Romania and Bulgaria, for now--can work as they please
   around Europe.

   Of those that are covered, highly-qualified young people on big
   salaries will have the easiest passage, being allowed in even without
   a job offer; medium-skilled workers will have to hunt around more
   carefully for points, unless their profession is deemed particularly
   in demand by a new council of economists. Low-skilled workers assigned
   to a third tier (again, only those from outside Europe) will be shut
   out, for the time being at least. Two remaining tiers will serve
   students and short-term workers such as pint-pulling backpackers.
   Ministers will be able to move points thresholds up and down according
   to what they, advised by assorted wise men, think is in the national
   interest. A possible next step, already advocated by the
   Conservatives, is annual quotas.

   Britain's skilled workforce is unlikely to change radically. The
   "gold-collar" workers who make the City of London tick should have
   little difficulty making it into Tier 1, under which any graduate
   earning more than £40,000 ($80,000) a year is expected to be admitted
   with few questions asked. And those who are coming in on internal
   transfers within their firms will face relaxed criteria, points out Mr
   Salt. In some industries this will make a big difference: some 80% of
   IT work permits, for example, go to such transferees.

   The biggest impact is likely to be on low-skilled workers such as the
   Ukrainians who pick fruit in Lincolnshire or Bangladeshis dishing up
   curry in London. Their sole route of entry--Tier 3--will be opened up
   only if there is a sudden need for such workers (to complete
   last-minute Olympic building, for instance, or to shore up care
   homes).

   Keeping out the unqualified to improve Britain's skills base may sound
   sensible, but it raises the question of who will do the jobs that
   require little more than willingness. Soon all Britons will have to
   stay in education or training until the age of 18, after which
   strawberry-picking would be a disappointing career. Britain reckons on
   filling the gap through an endless stream of workers from new EU
   states. But many overqualified Poles who have proved enthusiastic
   pickers of cabbages are already ditching agricultural hard labour in
   favour of bar-tending and the like in the cities. Fewer migrants will
   come in the first place, or stay, as their home countries get richer:
   wealthy Slovenia, for example, has sent hardly anyone to Britain. And
   other rich EU countries may soon seek to lure them.

   When these sources run dry there remain Bulgaria and Romania--and
   perhaps, one day, Turkey. But Britain may need to look beyond Europe
   sooner than it thinks. The economy has a seemingly insatiable appetite
   for foreign labour; and having grossly underestimated future numbers
   of eastern European workers a few years ago, the government would be
   embarrassed by overestimating them now.

