
   A symbolic measure will make little difference to violent crime 


   EVERY summer, in the Cambridge suburb of Romsey Town, a man emerges
   from his house dressed from head to foot in black and clutching a
   katana, a curved Japanese sword. Fortunately for his neighbours, the
   target of his ire is the weeds that have grown up in his garden. Half
   an hour later, the undergrowth reduced to stalks, he goes back inside.

   Not everyone is so harmlessly eccentric. On December 10th a man
   appeared at an Inverness court charged with attempting murder with a
   similar weapon. On the same day, to much fanfare, the Home Office said
   it would add "samurai swords" to a list of exotic-sounding proscribed
   weapons. These include butterfly knives, blowpipes and shuriken
   (throwing stars). It is already illegal to carry bladed weapons;
   adding the swords to the list will make it illegal to import or sell
   them.

   The crackdown is the latest attempt to calm worries about violent
   crime. Although such crime has fallen overall, attacks by strangers
   are as common as ever and getting nastier. A string of teenagers have
   been slain (with knives or guns) in London, Liverpool and Manchester.
   Laws have been tightened, penalties for possessing knives increased
   and teachers given powers to search their pupils.

   But the latest measure looks largely symbolic, says Richard Garside, a
   criminologist at King's College, London. Despite the gory headlines,
   sword attacks are rare. A few famous cases stand out, such as the
   killing of a Liberal Democrat councillor in 2000. Police reckon there
   have been around 80 attacks since 2003, with five people killed. In
   2006, by contrast, 210 died from gunshot wounds alone. No numbers are
   kept for knife deaths, but estimates of attacks range from 22,000 to
   60,000 a year.

   In any case, the precedents for a ban are not encouraging: gun crime
   has risen dramatically since legislation following the Dunblane
   massacre in 1996 made handguns of all kinds illegal. The sword ban is
   less swingeing, since exceptions will be made for martial-arts clubs
   and collectors. And it seems oddly specific: only "single-edged,
   curved blades" will be prohibited, leaving straight-bladed or
   double-edged weapons untouched.

   The few criminals who enjoy swordplay may simply change their
   preferences. The same websites that advertise "samurai swords" for
   sale often feature similar, but slightly smaller, "ninja
   swords"--which, with their straight blades, may be a good substitute.

