
   Is the health service really so good?


   "SICKO", the latest film from the left-wing American agitpropagandist
   Michael Moore, has already drawn a lot of comment for its favourable
   comparison of health care in Cuba with that in the United States. But
   Mr Moore does not reserve all his praise for the tiny Communist
   island. He lavishes admiration on Britain's National Health Service,
   presenting a vision of helpful staff and generous treatment.

   Britons themselves might doubt details of this assessment. In the past
   decade the government has increased spending on the NHS at a record
   rate, but the political pay-off has been abysmal. Polls show that
   people now reckon the Conservatives have better policies on health
   than Labour does. The number telling pollsters that the NHS has become
   worse since 1997 greatly exceeds those who say it has improved. On May
   23rd Patricia Hewitt, the health secretary, fought to survive a vote
   of no confidence in the House of Commons.

   Yet a recent report from the Commonwealth Fund, a health-policy
   think-tank in America, seems to side with Mr Moore. Comparing health
   care in six developed countries, it ranks Britain top. Germany comes
   second, followed by Australia and New Zealand in joint third place,
   and then Canada. America is last. Britain has seized the top spot
   after coming third in the two previous surveys, in 2004 and 2006.

   The report is a welcome antidote to unthinking pessimism about the
   NHS, but its rosy view is open to question. The survey uses 69
   indicators to rank the countries in five areas: quality, access,
   equity, outcomes and efficiency. Offering free health care to all, the
   NHS does unsurprisingly well on equity, but it comes fourth on health
   outcomes and access. What pushes it into top place overall is that it
   ranks first on quality and efficiency.

   On both of these counts, the scoring is debatable. Britain gets the
   best mark for quality even though it has the joint-worst score for the
   proportion of patients reporting an infection in hospital. This seems
   a more important failure than coming last, as Canada did, in prompting
   doctors by computer to give patients a test result. Yet both
   indicators are given the same weight.

   The efficiency rating is based on an eclectic range of indicators,
   such as health-care spending as a share of GDP and whether patients
   visit hospitals' emergency departments for conditions that could have
   been treated by family doctors. The individual comparisons may be
   revealing, but the sum of the parts does not measure efficiency, which
   is how effectively a system turns inputs into outputs.

   Perhaps most important, the indicators are skewed towards the services
   of family doctors. Britain has long won plaudits for the primary care
   delivered by its GPs. The real worries have been about hospitals,
   especially the long waiting times for elective operations. Although
   excessive waits have been slashed, there are still almost 700,000
   people on the waiting list.

   And now it looks as if Labour's reforms in primary care are
   backfiring. A new contract for GPs pushed up their average pay by 23%
   in its first year, though their workload dropped by more than five
   hours a week between 2004 and 2005. Practices open on Saturdays are a
   thing of the past.

   Gordon Brown, the prime minister to be, has promised to improve access
   to GPs at weekends and in the evenings. He will have to do more.
   However the NHS ranks internationally, what counts at home is that
   Labour has got poor value for the extra money poured into it.

