
   Political donations attract controversy once more

   IF SEX was the richest source of scandal under the last Conservative
   government, money has taken its place under Labour. Its first major
   controversy, in 1997, involved a donation from Bernie Ecclestone, a
   motor-racing tycoon. Tony Blair's final year as prime minister was
   dogged by a police investigation into whether peerages had been
   offered in return for loans. Last November the party's general
   secretary resigned over donations received from a property developer
   through third parties.

   The latest uproar involves Peter Hain, secretary of state both for
   Wales and for work and pensions. He campaigned last year for Labour's
   deputy leadership but came fifth of six candidates. On November 29th
   Mr Hain admitted that he had failed to register a £5,000 ($9,800)
   donation to his campaign. Four days later, after it emerged that a
   gift in kind by another donor had not been declared either, he
   promised to study his records and produce a full list of undeclared
   donations. On January 10th he revealed that there were 17 of these,
   amounting to over £103,000.

   Murkier still is the role played by an obscure think-tank, the
   Progressive Policies Forum (PPF), in channelling £55,000 to the
   campaign. Set up in December 2006, three months after Mr Hain said he
   would run for the post, it employs no staff and has published no
   research.

   Mr Hain blames the failure to declare the donations on sloppy campaign
   staff, and notes that the money came from legal sources. But critics
   insist that an oversight on this scale is unforgivable in a politician
   entrusted with running two departments. Even more troubling, they say,
   is the PPF. Many assume the think-tank was used to mask the identity
   of donors, but Mr Hain says he was not involved in setting it up.

   Mr Hain's future rests on the outcome of inquiries launched by the
   Electoral Commission (EC) and the parliamentary commissioner for
   standards. He is seen as a capable minister, but his vaulting ambition
   (his profligate campaign included an expensive full-page advertisement
   in a national newspaper) and lack of socialist roots (he was a Liberal
   before joining Labour) have denied him a base in the party. Support
   from the prime minister is also nuanced: on January 15th Gordon Brown
   absolved his minister of "corruption", attributing his mistake to
   "incompetence".

   The Conservatives' own funding controversies have contained that
   party's glee at Mr Hain's troubles. It was revealed on January 14th
   that David Cameron, the Tory leader, had failed to declare to the EC
   three free flights in 2005 (though they were declared in the
   parliamentary Register of Members' Interests). The day before, George
   Osborne, the shadow chancellor, was hit by the revelation that he did
   not declare more than £487,000 in donations in the register (though he
   did to the EC). Donors had given the money to the Tories' central
   budget but expressed a wish that it be used to support Mr Osborne.

   The cases are different. Mr Hain did not report his donations at all;
   Mr Osborne reported his to the EC, and it is not clear that they
   should have been declared in the parliamentary register as well.
   Guidance solicited from the registrar in December by the Tories' chief
   whip, Patrick McLoughlin, was taken to mean that the donations needed
   to be recorded only with the EC. The registrar then backtracked,
   prompting Mr McLoughlin to ask the Parliamentary Committee on
   Standards and Privileges on January 11th for clarification. But Labour
   MPs ask why the Tories waited 11 months after they began receiving the
   contributions to seek advice. The parliamentary commissioner for
   standards said on January 17th that he was investigating a complaint
   against Mr Osborne by two Labour MPs, who have also asked the EC to
   look into whether 80 Tory MPs have disclosed other types of donation
   properly.

   A badly needed cross-party consensus on reforming political-party
   funding has yet to emerge. The latest controversies should prompt
   agreement at least on the need for simplicity, however. The parallel
   existence of the EC and the parliamentary register, each with its own
   rules, ensures confusion. The sex scandals of the 1990s may have been
   seedy, but they were rarely the result of a misunderstanding.

