
   Technology and society: Is the outbreak of cancer videos, bulimia
   blogs and other forms of "user generated" medical information a
   healthy trend?


   VIDEOS of skateboarding dogs on YouTube might not appear to have
   anything to do with blogs about living with asthma. But the rise of
   "user-generated content"--spurred by sites such as YouTube, Facebook
   and Wikipedia--has also infected health care. Millions are now logging
   on to contribute information about topics stretching from avian-flu
   pandemics to the extraction of wisdom teeth or the use of acupuncture
   to overcome infertility. You could call it user-generated health care,
   or Health 2.0.

   In some ways this is nothing new. The BrainTalk Communities, an online
   support group for neurology patients, began in 1993. But content now
   comes in different forms, such as blogs and videos, and there are many
   more contributors. More than 20% of American internet users have
   created some sort of health-related content, according to Jupiter, a
   market-research firm. The hype around "Web 2.0" has made people aware
   of the new possibilities, says John Grohol, a psychologist who
   launched PsychCentral.com, a mental-health website, in 1995. The
   result, he says, has been a "snowball effect" of new content and new
   users.

   To gauge the size of this snowball, look at OrganizedWisdom, a firm
   based in New York. It launched in October 2006 as a health-care
   Wikipedia of sorts: a site to which consumers could contribute their
   own nuggets of health wisdom. Yet after only a few months it
   transformed itself into an index of the existing web content. The
   firm's founders had discovered that there already was quite enough
   user-generated health information online; the real problem was finding
   the good stuff.

   The explosion of user-generated content in health care is, in part,
   the result of broader internet trends: more and more people have
   broadband access and the tools for creating content are getting easier
   to use. New software, for instance, makes it easy to launch and
   maintain a site such as FluWikie (which provides information about
   preparing for an influenza pandemic), and digital cameras make it a
   snap to take and upload photos of, say, epigastric hernia surgery.

   But there are other drivers, too. Those with multiple chronic
   conditions, such as diabetes and depression, or lesser-known illnesses
   such as chronic fatigue syndrome, are anxious to get tips from others
   in similar situations. And today's body of medical knowledge is too
   vast for any one doctor to know it all. Cathy Fischer, a producer at a
   non-profit television company in San Francisco, for example, was not
   getting the information she needed from her doctor. So she joined an
   online group to connect with others who, like her, had undergone
   fibroid surgery.

   In some ways it is strange that there is so much discussion of
   health-related matters online, given that health, like money, is a
   topic that many people will not discuss even with family members.
   People do not seem to realise how permanent information can be online,
   warns Jennifer King, a researcher at the University of California in
   Berkeley. She worries that personal data could be misused. Some sites
   mitigate that risk by recommending the use of pseudonyms. So Meg7
   talks about her family's struggle with Lou Gehrig's disease, Aprilly
   shares information about babies with colic, and jojo1972 writes about
   how she handles migraine headaches.

   Misinformation is another worry. On the internet, as the old saying
   goes, nobody knows you are a dog--or an idiot, notes Dan Keldsen of
   AIIM, a non-profit association based in Silver Spring, Maryland, which
   helps companies manage digital information. And too much health
   information can confuse people, says Monique Levy of Jupiter. But a
   survey by the Pew Internet & American Life Project in Washington, DC,
   suggests that although user-generated information offers consumers
   more health options, the upside outweighs the risk, says Pew's
   Susannah Fox. Nearly one-third of the 100m Americans who have looked
   for health information online say that they or people they know have
   been significantly helped by what they found. In contrast, only 3%
   reported that online advice had caused serious harm.

   A lot of user-generated health information is accurate. A panel of
   neurology specialists judged that only 6% of information posted in the
   epilepsy-support group of BrainTalk was factually wrong, according to
   a study published in 2004 in the British Medical Journal. And with
   enough people online, misinformation is often quickly corrected.
   Inaccurate posts on the [3]website of the Association of Cancer Online
   Resources (ACOR), for example, will be pointed out within two hours,
   says Gilles Frydman, the founder of the association, based in New
   York.

   In some cases web-based information from other sufferers can be a
   patient's best hope. In the BrainTalk study, 40% of respondents said
   they used the site because their doctors did not or could not answer
   their questions. But the internet's power to connect people means that
   a person diagnosed with a rare form of cancer can find hundreds of
   other people across the world who can recommend doctors or provide
   first-hand information about treatment, explains Mr Frydman. He
   founded ACOR in 1996 after his wife was given inaccurate information
   about the treatment she needed for breast cancer. Given the potential
   benefits, the risk of giving up some privacy seems insignificant, he
   says. "If I am diagnosed with a rare cancer, I will think for two
   minutes, and then I will agree that giving up my privacy is
   worthwhile."

   Some observers expect even greater benefits from user-generated health
   sites in future. Patients who live with chronic diseases such as
   epilepsy often know more about them than their doctors, contends
   Daniel Hoch, a professor at Harvard Medical School who helped to found
   BrainTalk. Many doctors, he says, "don't get the wisdom of crowds."
   But he thinks the combined knowledge of a crowd of his patients would
   be far greater than his own. A wiki capturing the knowledge of, say,
   300 epileptics could be invaluable not only to others with epilepsy,
   but also to the medical professionals who care for them. Their
   aggregated understanding, he says, "would be helpful to all health
   care."

