
   Intellectual property: A new scheme will solicit comments via the
   internet to improve the vetting of patent applications

                                                             Lucy Vigrass

                                Lucy Vigrass

   PATENT examiners, who scrutinise applications for patents and
   determine whether they ought to be granted or not, are used to poring
   over diagrams of complicated contraptions. But now the patent system
   itself, just as complex in its own way, is under increasing scrutiny.

   The number of applications has soared in recent years, but patent
   offices have been unable to keep up--resulting in huge backlogs and
   lengthy delays. Standards have slipped and in America the number of
   lawsuits over contested patents has shot up (see chart). In an attempt
   to fix these problems, the United States Patent and Trademark Office
   (USPTO), Britain's Intellectual Property Office (IPO) and the European
   Patent Office are evaluating a radical change: opening the process up
   to internet-based collaboration.

   The scheme, known as "Peer to Patent", was created by Beth Simone
   Noveck, a professor at New York Law School. It applies an unusual form
   of peer review to a process which traditionally involves only a patent
   applicant and an examiner. Anybody who is interested may comment on a
   patent application via the internet. The scheme was launched as a
   one-year pilot programme in America on June 15th. Sean Dennehey of
   Britain's IPO, who sits on the project's advisory board, says his
   organisation will follow suit by the end of the year. The project is
   being supported by big technology firms including IBM, Microsoft and
   Hewlett-Packard.

   An efficient patent system is essential for the promotion of
   innovation. Patents give inventors a temporary monopoly on a new idea
   in return for disclosing how it works, so that others can subsequently
   build upon it. But if a patent is granted for something that is not
   novel (people are already doing it), or is obvious (any Tom, Dick, or
   Harry in the field could think it up), it can hamper innovation by
   turning a widely used invention or process into one person's monopoly.
   The trouble is that examiners cannot always tell when a patent is
   unwarranted.

   To prove that an invention is not novel, the patent examiner must find
   evidence that others have already done everything claimed in the
   patent, a quest known as a "prior art" search. Prior art is also the
   basis for determining whether some new step claimed in the invention
   is obvious--and therefore not worthy of a patent. But prior art can be
   elusive. It might be buried in an obscure technical journal, in
   conference slides, or in a doctoral thesis tucked away in a university
   library. It could even be embodied in a machine taken off the market
   years earlier. Finding prior art is hardest in fields where patenting
   is fairly new, such as software, biotechnology, financial services and
   business methods.

   Examiners are usually well versed in the technology they review and
   are adept at searching their office's collections of patents, along
   with other databases. But given the specialisation of modern science
   and technology, they cannot be expected to keep abreast of all the
   technical literature. To complicate matters further, says Jon Dudas,
   the director of the USPTO, patent applications have become more
   complex as well as more numerous: some applications contain thousands
   of claims. A biotech patent may be accompanied by gigabytes of
   computer data. And a quarter of the applications handled by the USPTO
   contain no references to prior art, adds Mr Dudas, while another
   quarter contain more than 25 references. This makes it hard for
   examiners to decide which ones deserve the closest scrutiny.

   There have already been several attempts to overhaul the system. Court
   cases and regulatory changes have altered it in various ways in recent
   years, but this has not done away with the perception that the system
   is in crisis, nor silenced those calling for further reform. In
   "Innovation and its Discontents", a book published in 2004, Adam Jaffe
   and Josh Lerner argue that some reforms have even made things worse.
   And "Patent Failure", a forthcoming book by James Bessen and Michael
   Meurer, argues that America's system does inventors more harm than
   good. Other critics have called for the elimination of patents on
   software, business processes and human genes.

   Several independent outfits already supplement the official
   patent-granting institutions. Among them is Patent Lens, run by
   CAMBIA, a non-profit research institute, which tries to make it easier
   to track down relevant patents in a particular field. Similarly,
   PatentFizz is a website that makes it easy to find out about
   particular patents, comment on them and even add references to prior
   art. In both cases the aim is to open the working of the patent system
   up to greater scrutiny.

   Peer to Patent builds on these ideas, especially the notion that
   practitioners and researchers within a particular field collectively
   have all the relevant prior art at their fingertips already. All the
   patent office needs to do, therefore, is to get that community to tell
   it what it already knows. Peer to Patent does this using the latest
   web-based collaboration tools, such as voting and tagging, which can
   harness the collective knowledge of a large number of users.

   The USPTO wants YOU

   The USPTO's pilot scheme will scrutinise 250 patent applications in a
   handful of computer-related fields, with the approval of the
   applicants. The first examples have been submitted by IBM, Intel,
   Microsoft and other technology giants. The text of each application is
   posted in full for public scrutiny, and members of the public can sign
   up to participate in the review process. They can discuss each
   application in an online forum, suggest examples of prior art, and
   vote for the prior art they consider most relevant. Messages that are
   considered off-topic can be flagged, and there are plans to allow
   participants to rate each other, so that the most highly regarded
   participants' recommendations rise to the top of the pile.

                                                             Lucy Vigrass
                                                             Lucy Vigrass

   Tagging, a common feature of many modern websites, is also used.
   Patents in new fields often sound like gobbledygook, since each
   inventor makes up his own terminology. But a user familiar with the
   field in question may realise that the invention matches something
   already in use under a different name. By adding an appropriate tag,
   that user can attract the attention of experts with a comprehensive
   knowledge of the field's prior art.

   Eventually, the ten pieces of prior art that receive most votes in the
   Peer to Patent community perusing each patent are sent to the patent
   examiner. As with conventional patent applications, examiners will
   still choose which prior art is referred to in their decision on a
   patent application, known as an "office action". But the community's
   explanations, discussion and examples will be taken into account.

   The pilot Peer to Patent scheme allows examiners and volunteer
   participants to provide feedback to refine the process. A total of 18
   measures will be used to assess the scheme and evaluate its
   effectiveness, including the number of items of prior art provided by
   the community that appear in office actions; the number of claims
   changed by applicants as a result of queries raised by the community;
   and the number of volunteer participants signed up, as well as their
   level of participation.

                                                  [spacer.gif] [gray.gif]
                                                             [spacer.gif]
      "The information provided should improve patent examiners' grasp of
                                                highly technical fields."
                                                             [spacer.gif]
                                                               [gray.gif]

   Mr Dudas says he considers Peer to Patent to be a "natural step" in
   opening up the patent system and fulfilling its original goal of
   encouraging the publication of new ideas. In Britain, Mr Dennehey
   regards Peer to Patent as a more up-to-date way for the public to
   submit observations during a patent examination, something already
   permitted by law. (In America, third parties are allowed to submit
   only prior art without comments under the current system.) Patent
   lawyers are also intrigued. Mark Costello, general patent counsel at
   Xerox, an American document-management company, says the idea has
   merit, but that he will be watching closely to see "whether it remains
   a fair and objective system after competitors enter the process".

   The scheme's immediate impact is likely to be minimal. Patent
   applicants are free to ignore the online community's discussions and
   respond only to the office action, as they always have. But if Peer to
   Patent succeeds, "we will have made the most significant improvement
   to the patent system in decades, and done a great service to the
   public and the economy," says Manny Schecter, a member of the
   project's steering committee and an intellectual-property lawyer at
   IBM.

   The hope is that Peer to Patent will reduce both uncertainty for
   inventors and unnecessary lawsuits because dodgy applications will be
   uncovered and rejected quickly. This ought to mean that patents issued
   will be stronger, leading to fewer challenges by those required to
   license them. Indirectly, the scheme could also help innovators to
   commercialise their ideas, since stronger patents will make
   patent-holders' work more attractive to investors.

   The information provided by the Peer to Patent community should also
   help patent examiners to improve their understanding of highly
   technical fields. Inventors and patent lawyers--who currently depend
   on the patent office's collection of patents and prior art when
   conducting prior-art searches--should gain, too.

   For all that, some observers are sceptical about bits of the Peer to
   Patent process. They wonder whether people will really volunteer to
   provide examples of prior art, join discussions, and so on. Ms Noveck
   cites the widespread participation in other online communities--such
   as Wikipedia, a collaborative online encyclopedia--as evidence of the
   public's desire to contribute. But although everyone knows what an
   encyclopedia is, and the pages of Wikipedia can be edited with a few
   clicks, not many people understand the patent process, or know how to
   read a patent.

   Another concern is that the people who take part in the project will
   represent vested interests--in particular, big technology firms which
   can assign staff to review patents. There are also worries about the
   possibility of tacit collusion among large patent-holders, who might
   attack individual inventors in order to keep them out of specific
   markets.

   Ms Noveck, however, is a believer in grassroots democracy. If Peer to
   Patent's goal of cleaning up the patent system was not already
   audacious enough, she thinks the project could also serve as a
   demonstration that the public, helped by technology, can participate
   more fully in its own governance. Unfortunately, Peer to Patent
   suffers from the same vulnerabilities as other democratic
   institutions. If the public engages with it earnestly, it could
   produce marvellous results. But if people tire of it and cede control
   to special interests that do not align with the public interest, Peer
   to Patent could devolve into just another prop for the status quo. The
   project's outcome, at this early stage, remains uncertain. But it is
   surely worth a try.

