
   Why teenagers are losing out to younger viewers

                                                                      BBC

                                    BBC


   FOR fans, it is the biggest scandal since Gonch Gardner made off with
   Mr Bronson's toupee at the swimming pool. "Grange Hill", a BBC
   children's television drama about an inner-city school and its raucous
   pupils, is getting a makeover as it celebrates its 30th anniversary
   this year. Formerly stuffed with edgy teenage storylines--drugs,
   gangs, pregnancy and so on--the next series will instead follow a
   younger cast, pitching more innocent plotlines to an audience of
   under-12s. Blasphemy, according to the programme's creator, Phil
   Redmond, who says it would be better for the series to "hang up its
   mortar board".

   The squeezing out of original programming for teenage viewers is one
   unexpected early consequence of the arrival of multi-channel digital
   television. Children are among the most eager adopters of digital TV,
   and now spend 82% of their viewing time on specialist digital channels
   rather than the old analogue five. Their parents are happy to indulge
   them: 90% of households with children have multi-channel television,
   against 76% of childless homes. More channels have meant lots more
   choice: some 113,000 hours of children's programmes were broadcast in
   2006, compared with 20,000 in 1998.

   But there is a catch: nearly all of this is either imported or
   repeated. By 2006 only 1% of children's broadcasting consisted of
   original material made in Britain. Increased competition for viewers
   from the new channels, as well as bans on advertising junk food during
   children's shows, has made it unprofitable to commission expensive new
   children's programmes. Britain's main commercial broadcasters have
   halved their investment in children's shows since 1998.

   Pre-schoolers are getting the lion's share of what is left, partly
   because they are more likely to watch with their parents, whom
   advertisers will pay more to reach. The BBC, which is funded by a tax
   on households with televisions, has managed to increase its spending
   on children's programmes--yet it too seems to be focusing on younger
   kids. Its children's service, which used to cater for under-16s, was
   redefined in 2006 to attract under-12s away from competitors such as
   Disney and Nickelodeon. Programmes for older children, such as "Grange
   Hill", are having to soften their content accordingly. A new
   teenagers' brand, BBC Switch, was launched in October, but its output
   is slim and mainly on the web, where Beeb bosses reckon teenagers now
   lurk. The television-minded among the over-12s are increasingly left
   to watch adult-oriented programmes or imports for children.

   Does it matter if young people come to consume almost exclusively
   television programmes that are made abroad? It might. "Grange Hill"
   and its ilk tackle awkward subjects that foreign series tend to shy
   away from, and in a British context that makes them more real to
   British children. And television helps to mould national identity.
   Most Britons under 40 can remember "Grange Hill" teachers as vividly
   as their own, and in some circles few things garner more respect than
   a "Blue Peter" badge. (The Economist's own [4]Bagehot has one, though
   he is too modest to wear it.) Finally, exporting programmes is a form
   of soft power. Big Bird is more famous than Condoleezza Rice;
   Britain's best ambassadors could well be the Teletubbies.

