
   Why cities' plans for renewal often sound strangely familiar

   A STROLL through the centre of most British cities is much prettier
   now than it was a decade ago. Though output in the north has grown
   more slowly than elsewhere, its cities have beautified themselves:
   boules pistes and public sculpture liven up formerly deserted bits of
   Leeds; the seafront at Hull boasts a futuristic new aquarium. A year
   of civic jollification has just begun in Liverpool, named "European
   Capital of Culture 2008" and given a big dollop of European Union
   cash. This week Sheffield presented plans for a new high-tech "digital
   square mile", complete with suitably jazzy new buildings.

   The cranes on provincial skylines are encouraging. But followers of
   regeneration, as the business of boosting down-at-heel neighbourhoods
   is now known, might notice that many cities seem to be thinking alike.
   Sheffield's digital square mile will complement what neighbouring
   Leeds calls its own "digital cluster"; over the Pennines, Salford is
   beavering away on a "digital-industries hub". And though Liverpool is
   the official capital of culture, places such as Gateshead (where the
   huge Baltic flour mill is now an arts centre) and Wakefield (which is
   due to open a new Barbara Hepworth gallery in the winter of 2009) have
   similar hopes.

   Why do city councils have the same ideas about how to grow? One reason
   is that they have the same people advising them. Since Labour moved
   regeneration up the agenda in 1997, creating a spider's web of
   regional-development bodies and arming them with cash to dish out, a
   regeneration-consulting industry has sprung up. Regeneration &
   Renewal, a weekly trade magazine, lists scores of organisations happy
   to advise councils on how to bid for, and spend, the money. Following
   the advice of one such consultant, Sheffield now wants to club
   together with Leeds and Manchester to form a single "super-city". Last
   year the same outfit advised Glasgow and Edinburgh, which are engaged
   in a similar collaborative effort.

   If consultants can spread good ideas and not just recycle tired ones,
   so much the better. But the homogeneity of city-development strategies
   also owes much to the British government's enduring top-down approach
   to local government. In England a great deal of regeneration work is
   steered by nine Regional Development Agencies (RDAs), whose members
   are appointed by, and report to, central government. This has
   encouraged uniformity: "Once a minister identified a sector as
   important, it tended to trigger a herd mentality among RDAs," says
   Dermot Finch of the Centre for Cities, a think-tank. Following a
   minister's remarks about the brilliance of creative industries a few
   years ago, every regional agency began overstating the contribution of
   the creative sector to its economy. Other notable recent fads include
   biotechnology, financial services and exploiting the 2012 Olympics.

   But the RDAs are getting less herd-like, Mr Finch reckons, and local
   authorities are being given a bit more freedom. So far, cities have
   tended to follow the lead of regional agencies, partly because they
   hold important purse strings, but also because cities are inexpert at
   making their own assessment of the best way to grow. The Treasury has
   spotted this problem, and in July proposed that local authorities
   should be forced to spend more time examining the needs of their
   economies, in return for being given more say over how cash is spent.
   With luck, better-tailored, more varied strategies might emerge.
   Having long promoted regional agencies as the best means of
   regenerating deprived areas, it would be good if the government put
   some power back into the hands of the regeneratees themselves.

