
                                                                       PA

                                     PA

   The Conservatives are doing well, but not well enough

   [3]David Cameron

   DAVID CAMERON, who marked his second anniversary as leader of the
   Conservative Party on December 6th, knows the wisdom of at least one
   of Westminster's ancient maxims. A week really is a long time in
   politics: at the start of his party's conference in October, he looked
   likely to lose the snap election that Gordon Brown, riding high as
   prime minister, was expected to call; by its end, he had regained a
   momentum that has yet to desert him.

   He must now hope that another grizzled saying is true: that
   oppositions don't win elections, governments lose them. Recent events
   have compromised the government's claims to competence (the taxman
   lost the personal data of millions of citizens) and probity (a
   party-funding scandal forced the resignation of Labour's general
   secretary). Labour's support has fallen to about 33% (see chart). Yet
   the Tories have not pulled away decisively: they are polling at around
   40%, which is short of both the 45% mark that Mr Cameron has made his
   party's target and the 60% that Labour scored under Tony Blair in
   1995. Labour then was more than 30 points ahead of the governing
   Tories; today the Tories are less than ten points ahead of Labour.

   Conservatives note that they face a stronger government than Sir John
   Major's. None of its recent mistakes has been as ruinous for voters as
   the recession of the early 1990s. Neither is it as exhausted of ideas:
   Sir John never produced anything as vaulting as the children's plan
   unveiled on December 11th.

   Yet the Tories must raise their game. Thanks to uneven constituency
   sizes, the Tories need more votes than Labour to win the same number
   of parliamentary seats; their current poll ratings do not suggest that
   they would gain a majority. And if Mr Brown's failure to call a snap
   election hurt him politically, it also raised the bar for Mr Cameron.
   A narrower Labour majority would have been a fine result this autumn;
   a Tory victory is expected in an election in 2009 or 2010. But why,
   given Labour's woes, are the Tories not out of sight?

   One reason may be a lack of high-calibre people. Tories insist they
   are a match for Labour in key positions. None of their top four--Mr
   Cameron, George Osborne, the shadow chancellor, William Hague, the
   shadow foreign secretary, and David Davis, the shadow home
   secretary--is outclassed by his Labour opposite number. But lower down
   is a problem. Mr Cameron is said to be disappointed at the number of
   cabinet-worthy MPs at his disposal.

   Another factor is the Tories' perceived fuzziness on policy. A row
   over selective grammar schools began a bad summer for the party. Talk
   of the voluntary sector playing a bigger role in delivering public
   services lacks flesh. And foreign-policy views seem less clearly
   defined than Labour's before 1997, when Mr Blair held ambitions to
   make Britain an unambiguously European nation.

   Yet much policy wonkery is going on behind the scenes. Commissions set
   up to investigate public services, social justice, competitiveness,
   the environment, the constitution and security have reported back,
   often in epic detail. Green papers have been produced on school reform
   and energy; more are scheduled. An implementation unit is being
   created to examine how policies can be put into practice in
   government. Only within Mr Brown's economic remit was such exhaustive
   work done when Labour was in opposition.

   Indeed, if Mr Cameron's first year at the Tory helm saw style
   privileged over substance, the party may now have lurched too far in
   the opposite direction. Energy expended on policy detail is energy not
   spent articulating an animating vision of how the country would be
   transformed by a Tory government. Even Mr Cameron's supporters concede
   that he is better at conveying competence and reasonableness than at
   rousing passion for change.

   The Tories also face a challenge from the Liberal Democrats, who
   announce their new leader on December 17th. Either Nick Clegg, their
   home-affairs spokesman, or Chris Huhne, who holds the environment
   brief, will make a pitch to those voters disillusioned with Labour but
   sceptical about whether the Tories have changed. Many such voters are
   outside the south-east, the Tories' natural home. Mr Cameron's appeal
   in marginal constituencies in the midlands and the north has yet to be
   tested, though Tories point hopefully to results in the local
   elections in May.

   Other hazards remain. One is Boris Johnson, the party's popular but
   disorganised candidate in London's mayoral election next May. Party
   staff are concerned that a lazy campaign ending in a heavy defeat by
   Ken Livingstone, the Labour incumbent, would reflect badly on Mr
   Cameron. Some believe a victory for Mr Johnson would be even worse, if
   he turned out to be a shambolic leader of Britain's capital.

   Another is the possibility of a right-wing revanche. Mr Cameron's
   modernising creed has not put down deep roots within his party: many
   MPs and activists only tolerated a move to the centre because it
   seemed a winning strategy. That the party's recent recovery began with
   a promise to lift millions of households out of the inheritance-tax
   net may embolden them to start asking for more of the same.

   It may be that the government's various troubles--perhaps including an
   economic downturn next year--will be enough to hand the Tories the
   next election. Mr Cameron would be unwise to count on it.

