
   Computing: The German Democratic Republic bequeathed a 600m-piece
   puzzle to the reunified country. It is about to be solved using
   software

                                                               Fraunhofer
                                                               Fraunhofer

                                                     Look, an edge piece!

   WHEN the shredding machines failed and the mob was at the gates, the
   spooks at East Germany's State Security Service, better known as the
   Stasi, tried turning their files into mush by dunking them in water.
   But the number of bathtubs in their headquarters in Normannenstrasse
   was as unequal to the task as the machines had been. In the end, they
   resorted to tearing each page up by hand. The fact that many of the
   resulting shreds are only a few millimetres across is testament to
   just how much the soon-to-be-ex-members of the intelligence service
   did not want their work to fall into the public domain.

   If Bertram Nickolay of the Fraunhofer Institute for Production Systems
   and Design Technology, in Berlin, has his way, however, the public
   domain is exactly where they will soon end up. Using the institute's
   expertise in pattern-matching technology, he and his colleagues are
   about to embark on one of the biggest jigsaw puzzles of all time--or,
   rather, 45m of them. For that is the number of pages which the 600m
   fragments of paper, stored in more than 16,000 bags that were
   recovered from Normannenstrasse, are thought to represent.

   At first glance the task of joining that many shreds looks impossible,
   even when each shred has been scanned so that the matching can be done
   by machine. The secret, as with any computing task, is to break the
   problem into smaller, more manageable chunks. The first stage of this
   breakdown was done, unwittingly, by the Stasi themselves. Since they
   were in a hurry, the shredders tended to stuff all the bits of a given
   document into a single bag. That greatly simplifies the problem, so
   that rather than being nearly impossible it becomes merely unwieldy.

   The next stage is to group the shreds from a single bag according to
   various criteria. These include the colour and texture of the paper
   each shred is made from, whether that paper is lined or not, the
   colour of the ink used, whether that ink represents a picture, a piece
   of typewritten text or a piece of handwriting, and--if it is
   handwriting--what style.

   Only when a group of related shreds has been found using these
   criteria does the actual puzzling begin. That is done the way human
   puzzlers do it, by paying attention to shapes and sizes of the pieces,
   and the contours of their edges. If two shreds can be connected, they
   are regarded as one larger shred, and are thrown back into the heap of
   images to be analysed and compared with the others. Thus, as with a
   real jigsaw, areas get progressively filled in until the whole picture
   is finally complete.

   Like a human, the program that does the puzzling is capable of
   learning. It spawns slightly altered versions of itself that compete
   for computer time on the basis of their success at finding matches.
   The most successful are then mutated again, in a process similar to
   biological evolution. This is necessary because unlike a real jigsaw
   or a machine-shredded document, in which the pieces fit perfectly, the
   shreds of a torn document are slightly distorted and frayed at the
   edges. Deciding what matches what therefore requires judgment, which
   is notoriously difficult to program in advance. Indeed, if the program
   really cannot make up its mind whether two shreds match or not, it
   refers the matter to a human operator.

   Dr Nickolay is planning to process about 400 bags over the course of
   the next two years as a final test of the technology. If that works,
   it will just be a question of adding more scanners and computers to
   expose the truth about East Germany's dark past.

