
   Voters like the idea of tougher borders, but the cost is high and the
   benefits are limited

   ILLEGAL migrants risk their lives to better themselves. Europeans are
   more aware of Africans drowning in the Mediterranean in the summer
   holiday season, but boats are wrecked all year round. In mid-December
   51 migrants drowned off the Greek island of Samos, one of the worst
   such incidents in recent memory. Mexicans dying in Arizona's desert
   rarely make headlines any more. And not a lot is heard about the
   600,000 people a year, perhaps more, who the UN says are trafficked
   and often forced into prostitution. Bonded labour, too, is dismally
   common.

                                                                      AFP

                                    AFP

                          India's way with a fence

   Europe and America are both making big efforts to control their
   southern borders. The EU's system, run by its member countries, is
   called Frontex. In 2006 most sea-borne African migrants washed up on
   the Canaries; in 2007 it was the turn of the central Mediterranean,
   especially Malta and Italy. In the coming year watch Greece and
   Cyprus, where a trickle of boat people from Egypt and Turkey may turn
   into a flood. With some 100 patrol craft, plus spotter planes,
   land-based radar and other technology, Frontex does seem to be making
   it more difficult to get in.

   A trip with a night patrol on a Greek coastguard vessel from the
   island of Samos shows how. The boat, with tinted and bullet-proofed
   windows, accelerates above 30 knots as a searchlight illuminates a
   350-metre radius and a radar scans the nearby Turkish coast. Six
   guards aboard, some brandishing M4 rifles, peer into the darkness.
   Fishing and tourist craft appear in the gloom. Spotting a raftload of
   immigrants would be easy, though those on small rubber dinghies or
   swimming with snorkels and flippers would be harder to find. The boat
   is kept busy. In the 24 hours before this patrol several dozen illegal
   migrants were plucked from the sea and the rocky shore and taken to a
   detention centre in Samos. Greece has 30 such boats, plus four
   aeroplanes for air-sea surveillance.

   Even the bright and well-educated risk misery. An Ethiopian law
   student in Greece tells of his wretched trip to Europe: he bribed
   Ethiopian border officials, hid in a truck carrying coffee in Sudan,
   endured seven days in the Sahara, spent months in a grim camp in
   Libya, suffered a terrifying voyage across the Mediterranean, hitched
   a lift in a frozen-meat lorry in Turkey, scavenged in a forest for
   days and feared he would drown in a fishing boat that carried him into
   the EU. He paid several thousand dollars for the journey and ended up
   locked in a cramped and stinking warehouse on the island of Samos,
   crammed with asylum-seekers. Dejected, he says he wants to go home.

   America's frontier with Mexico has even more gear, gadgets and
   manpower on display. Unmanned Predator Bee drones float at 12,000
   feet, helping to guide officers in bulletproof helicopters, in jeeps,
   on horseback, on mountain bikes and on all-terrain buggies towards any
   would-be migrants. Seismic sensors catch footfalls, magnetic ones
   notice cars, infra-red beams are useful for tunnels. Some 18,000
   officers man the border crossings and a further 15,000 (due to rise to
   18,000 by the end of 2008) patrol in-between them.

   Perhaps the best way to look at the border is from the air. As an
   A-star helicopter lurches into the late-morning haze above San Ysidro,
   southern California, it becomes obvious that crossing from Tijuana on
   the Mexican side is no longer easy. Running a dozen miles inland from
   the Pacific ocean is a wide double fence, one to block cars, the other
   to stop pedestrians. Watchtowers and surveillance cameras, tall wire
   mesh and lots of border guards line the frontier. Occasionally
   migrants still scamper over the fence with improvised ladders. From
   the air a series of concrete paths becomes apparent, running
   crossways. These are tunnels, regularly dug from the southern side,
   regularly filled in again by the border patrol. Some have stretched
   for half a mile, complete with lighting, ventilation and a track for
   rolling carts.

   After 12 miles the fence becomes a single line, and two miles after
   that it stops. From here on the hills rise, providing a natural
   barrier. Now the "virtual fence" takes over--drones, helicopters,
   sensors. By the end of 2008 some 670 miles of fencing will be erected
   along the 1,969-mile border. In many places the fence is made of
   Vietnam-era concrete slabs designed for runways and turned on their
   sides.

   Europe and America are not alone in their taste for well-policed
   borders. South Africa, deluged by migrants from north of the Limpopo
   river, is trying to enforce its own. In 2007 it reportedly deported an
   average of 4,000 people a week. India is finishing an iron barrier 2.5
   metres high along the 4,100km (2,500 mile) boundary with Bangladesh,
   at a cost of more than $1 billion, to mark a fuzzy frontier and keep
   out poor Bangladeshis.

   Are the barriers doing any good? The answer depends on your
   objectives. With Frontex in Europe, for example, the craft, for all
   their guns and scary looks, sometimes have to act as rescue boats. It
   is said that some migrants, once they have arrived in EU waters, phone
   ahead to get someone to collect them, confident that they will not be
   turned away. To make sure, they sometimes slash their dinghy with a
   knife as the patrol boat arrives.

   In America, look down from the helicopter at the spot where the fence
   stops. Here the paths begin: thousands of jagged tracks in the
   scrubland, stretching north to south, worn into the rust-coloured
   earth by millions of human footsteps. The migrants have a simple way
   of dealing with the technology: they walk around the fence. Only some
   are then stopped.

   Even those detained at the border have every reason to expect to make
   it across eventually. On the day your correspondent visited, two men
   had been chased, tackled, dragged through a bush and handcuffed in the
   back of a border patrol car. They were taken to a processing centre in
   the nearby town of Nogales, their fingerprints scanned and checked
   against a database of criminals. Those not on a wanted list are
   usually deported within 24 hours. But many will turn round and try
   again.

   In Europe an even larger proportion of those stopped at the borders
   end up staying. Many will attempt to claim asylum, saying they are
   escaping from a war. Those who are not able to convince officials that
   they are refugees may still be able to stay if the EU lacks a
   deportation agreement with their home country. If deportation is
   impossible, they are released after a time and melt away.

   Don't even think about it

   No doubt the borders are becoming harder to cross. Franco Frattini,
   Europe's commissioner for justice and home affairs, is delighted with
   Frontex. The first eight months of 2007 showed 72% fewer migrants
   crossing to the Canaries and 41% fewer in the central Mediterranean
   than the year before. "It shows it is possible to cut because of the
   impact of deterrence," he says. America's fence-builders are also
   pleased. Official figures released in November showed a one-fifth
   decline in cross-border apprehensions, from just over 1m in fiscal
   2006 to 858,000 in fiscal 2007, the lowest number in five years.

   The high prices charged by people-smugglers reflect the growing
   difficulty, as well as the relative risk and discomfort of the journey
   (see table 3). The cheapest way to reach San Diego is to curl up in
   the boot of a willing driver's car and hope that sniffer dogs will not
   find you, or to use a fake or stolen passport. Tunnels and guided
   hikes are more pricey. Ten years ago a trip from Mexico to Phoenix,
   Arizona, cost $250-500, but now it will be more like $3,000. If you
   are an "OTM" (Other Than Mexican, in the language of the guards),
   rates are higher.

   Fences are popular with those who live on the right side of them. The
   first barriers in San Ysidro went up in the early 1990s as part of
   "Operation Gatekeeper", helping to end chaos and violence. Huge
   numbers of illegal migrants used to gather on the border, then run
   across, thousands at a time, overwhelming border guards. Today
   shopping malls, warehouses and housing fill an area that was once
   scrubland too dangerous for the police to patrol. Land and property
   prices have soared. But although some illegal migrants are deterred by
   fences, the recent drop in apprehensions in America may have as much
   to do with the housing-market slump, which means fewer are drawn north
   in the first place.

   Other illegal migrants are diverted to new and more dangerous routes.
   Thus African boat people endure longer trips in wilder seas. More
   Mexicans strike out over those natural barriers. With inadequate
   water, high-caffeine drinks, garlic to ward off rattlesnakes and a
   goat's foot for luck, the ill-prepared are dying in alarming numbers
   in Arizona's desert. Since 2000, in the sector around Tucson alone,
   some 1,137 bodies have been found. There are probably many more still
   out there.

   Nor does it seem much to celebrate that job-seekers are handing more
   of their savings to criminals, such as the Arellano Felix cartel that
   controls much of the Mexican side of the California border. Some fund
   their crossings by becoming criminals themselves, either as guides for
   other migrants or as drug mules. They are also carrying knives and
   guns more often.

   The bigger concern is that fences might in fact push up the total
   number of illegal migrants inside any given rich country. After all,
   the more costly and dangerous it is to cross, the less people will
   feel like leaving. Migrants quite often return home for a while--but
   only if they know it will be relatively easy to get back in. The
   tougher the border, the more incentive migrants have to stay and
   perhaps to get their families to join them instead.

   One migration expert in Washington, DC, says that higher walls will
   keep people in as well as out: "The more that is spent on the border,
   the more illegal migrants stay here. Our politicians are not stupid.
   They know that walls do not stop people. It is a loser's game." That
   argument is well understood in Europe, too. One official dealing with
   immigration policy in Brussels says: "It is playing King Canute to say
   that you can stop illegal migration. It has never worked. It is no
   easier to stop than prostitution." But, on both sides of the Atlantic,
   tough borders are popular with voters, so they are here to stay.

   They may become more effective if combined with other high-tech
   enforcement. The EU has a pan-continental fingerprint database for
   asylum-seekers called Eurodac which lets officials track those who
   have been detained. Britain is introducing identity cards for
   foreigners, including biometric information, and in France Mr Sarkozy
   will now go ahead with DNA testing of supposed blood relatives. In
   America every detained illegal immigrant has his fingerprints recorded
   through a system called IAFIS, which is linked to the FBI and other
   crime databases.

   American employers are also facing tougher checks on whether they use
   undocumented labour. An electronic database, E-verify, lets registered
   employers check instantly whether workers are authorised to be in the
   country. And more employers who break the law are facing arrests and
   fines: 863 arrests were made in 2007, against only 25 five years
   earlier.

