
   Medicine: A new approach to proton-beam radiotherapy, which allows
   treatment to be precisely targeted, could make it more widely
   available

   RADIOTHERAPY, the use of radiation zipping through the DNA of cancer
   cells to kill them or halt their reproduction, has always had the
   disadvantage of causing collateral damage to healthy tissue. But some
   forms of radiation are worse than others. One of the best is a beam of
   protons. Unlike X-rays, the standard radiotherapeutic tool, a proton
   beam can be tuned in a way that causes it to dump its destructive
   energy at a particular depth beneath the skin. This means it can
   destroy a tumour without damaging other tissue. Unfortunately, the
   machines needed to generate such beams weigh several hundred tonnes
   and cost $100m or more to build. So although proton therapy has been
   available since 1990, there are still only about 25 clinics around the
   world that offer it.

   An announcement at a meeting of the American Association of Physicists
   in Medicine, held in Minneapolis in July, could change this, however.
   Thomas Mackie of the University of Wisconsin has a new approach that
   he hopes will bring the cost of a proton-therapy machine down to $20m
   and the space required to a smallish room.

   The dielectric-wall accelerator (DWA) that lies at the heart of Dr
   Mackie's machine was designed in the 1990s at the Lawrence Livermore
   National Laboratory in California as a portable X-ray source. At
   first, it was used to accelerate electrons rather than protons. Those
   electrons were smashed into a metal target to generate the high-energy
   X-rays that Livermore's physicists needed to peek inside ageing bombs
   and check that they were still in working order. But Dennis Matthews,
   one of Livermore's more medically minded programme directors, realised
   that by changing the polarity of the machine it could be used to
   accelerate positively charged protons, rather than negatively charged
   electrons. He then teamed up with the cancer centre at the University
   of California, Davis, to investigate the possibility of using a DWA
   for proton therapy.

   The advantage of the DWA is its small size. Like all particle
   accelerators, it uses an electric field to speed up electrically
   charged particles. Most accelerators, however, speed up the particles
   over a long distance, using a moderate field. The DWA employs a
   succession of enormous fields over just a couple of metres.

   That it is able to do so is the result of two technical advances. The
   first is an arrangement of insulating materials and conductors called
   a high-gradient insulator. Every insulator has a threshold beyond
   which the electrons are ripped off its component atoms and it becomes
   a conductor. Livermore's high-gradient insulator, though, damps down
   the early stages of this ripping process and creates a threshold so
   high that it can support the electric fields the DWA requires.

   The second advance is a way of switching thousands of volts on and off
   in a few billionths of a second, a previously impossible feat. This
   requires a trick opposite to the first one--suddenly making an
   insulator into a conductor. The insulator in question is silicon
   carbide. When hit with laser light of the correct frequency, it
   becomes conductive.

   The DWA, then, is a tube with an inner wall made of the high-gradient
   insulator and a series of silicon carbide switches along its length.
   As the switches are hit by a carefully timed sequence of laser pulses,
   a powerful electric field is created. Viewed from inside the tube,
   this field looks like an accelerating electrical pulse, and it is this
   pulse that picks up and carries the electrons--or, if the polarity is
   reversed, the protons.

   Once Davis's scientists had pronounced the general idea sound, they
   and Dr Matthews looked around for a commercial collaborator. They lit
   on a firm called TomoTherapy, which is where Dr Mackie came in--for,
   besides working at Wisconsin, he is also TomoTherapy's co-founder. At
   the moment the firm sells machines that tune traditional, X-ray-based
   radiotherapy to make it more effective. The idea is to adapt the
   techniques the firm has developed for controlling X-rays to control
   protons. It will take a while to determine whether this will work. But
   if it does, radiation therapy for cancer could become a lot less
   traumatic and a lot more effective.

