
   Britain's penal system is looking less European and more American


   IN THE sunny early days of Gordon Brown's premiership, it seemed for a
   while that a radical change in penal policy was on the horizon. "We
   cannot carry on building prisons indefinitely and we need to look at
   new approaches," Lord Falconer, then the justice minister, had said in
   May. Two months later his successor, Jack Straw, called for a
   "national conversation" about the use of custody. The prison system,
   one of the few public services not yet thoroughly overhauled by
   Labour, looked like a place for Mr Brown to leave his mark.

   That now seems unlikely. On December 5th Mr Straw announced plans to
   build yet more prisons, as recommended in a report that day by Lord
   Carter, a favourite government problem-solver (and once the best man
   at Mr Straw's wedding). With their 81,000 jail places full up, England
   and Wales already lock away more of their population than any western
   European country bar Luxembourg. At a cost of £2.7 billion, Mr Straw
   now plans to add 15,000 more places by 2014.

   No big new jails will be ready until 2010, so until then the
   government will have to rely on quick fixes such as converting an old
   army base and buying a prison ship (embarrassingly, it sold one only
   last year). Once ready, the "Titans", as the big new jails have been
   christened, will hold 2,500 inmates each, making them twice the size
   of Britain's largest existing prisons. A shame, argues Gavin Lockhart
   of Policy Exchange, a think-tank: more small, local jails would have
   kept convicts near their families, helping their rehabilitation.
   Economies of scale seem to have won the day.

   Even the Titans will only just keep pace with the demand for places
   (see chart). If official estimates are right, by 2014 the number of
   people locked up will have doubled in 20 years. To outsiders this
   suggests a country riddled with crime. Yet crime has broadly been
   falling. One of Labour's proudest boasts is that crime has dipped by a
   third since it came to power in 1997 (critics counter that serious
   offences have become more common).

   Prisoner numbers have risen partly because the police are bringing
   more offenders to justice. But the big increase is due to changes in
   sentencing: many petty criminals who once would have been fined are
   now jailed, and serious offenders' sentences are 20% longer than they
   were in 1995. New crime laws have increased the penalties for the
   worst offences, causing sentence inflation across the board.

   Putting a lid on the prison population will mean restraining
   sentences. Lord Carter suggested a way of doing this, too: an
   independent commission that would set sentencing guidelines according
   to prison capacity. At the moment, guidelines are determined by a
   hotch-potch of statute and precedent; the government simply has to
   build however many prisons are required as a result. Under the Carter
   plan, the boot would be on the other foot: sentencing would have to
   take into account the limitations on capacity. So ramping up jail
   terms for violent criminals might only be possible if more shoplifters
   were sentenced to community service, for example.

   Setting sentences according to capacity, rather than vice-versa, could
   be hard to sell to voters, who reflexively believe that crime is
   getting worse and that longer sentences are the answer. The government
   has set up a "working party" to look into the proposal, which may
   spell doom. That would be a wasted chance, says Rob Allen of King's
   College, London. Factoring in the consequences of sentencing is
   sensible as well as humane: "We are making an astonishing investment
   in something of limited social benefit. Prison is an expensive
   resource that ought to be used sparingly."

   Without radical changes, expect many more Titans. As Lord Carter
   notes, the pressure on prison numbers is unlikely to abate. Mr Allen
   is gloomy: "This could be a watershed. We seem to be moving closer
   towards an American model." That is some way off: America still locks
   up five times more of its citizens than Britain does. But the gap is
   narrowing. Since 1995 America's prison population has increased by
   42%, while Britain's has jumped by 60%. In Europe, where numbers were
   already more restrained, Germany's inmates swelled by just 16%, and
   France's by 1%.

