
   Energy: Using photosynthesis to capture exhaust gases from power
   plants could reduce the emissions produced by coal-fired stations

   FOR its supporters, the idea of growing single-celled algae on exhaust
   gas piped from power stations is the ultimate in recycling. For its
   detractors, it is a mere pipe dream. Whoever turns out to be right,
   though, it is an intriguing idea: instead of releasing the carbon
   dioxide produced by burning fossil fuels into the atmosphere, why not
   recapture it by photosynthesis? The result could then be turned into
   biodiesel (since many species of algae store their food reserves as
   oil), or even simply dried and fed back into the power station. Of
   course, if it were really that easy, someone would have done it
   already. But although no one has yet commercialised the technology,
   several groups are trying.

   One of them is GS CleanTech, which has developed a bioreactor based on
   a patent held by a group of scientists at the Ohio Coal Research
   Centre, at the University of Ohio. The GS CleanTech bioreactor uses a
   parabolic mirror to funnel sunlight into fibre-optic cables that carry
   the light to acrylic "glow plates" inside the reactor. These diffuse
   the light over vertical sheets of polyester that form the platform on
   which the algae grow. Eventually the polyester is unable to support
   the weight of the algae, and they fall off into a collection duct
   positioned underneath.

   GreenFuel Technologies, based in Cambridge, Massachusetts, has a
   different approach. Its reactor is composed of a series of clear
   tubes, each with a second, opaque tube nested inside. This arrangement
   makes it possible to bubble the exhaust gas down through the outer
   compartment and then bubble it back up through the opaque middle. The
   bubbling gas causes turbulence and circulates the algae around the
   reactor. The constant shift between light and darkness as the algal
   cells circulate increases the amount of carbon that they fix, probably
   by promoting chemical reactions that occur naturally only at night.

   A preliminary test of GreenFuel's reactor design, which was performed
   at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology's campus power plant,
   suggested that it can remove 75% of the carbon dioxide from a power
   station's exhaust. A more serious test is now being carried out by
   Arizona Public Service, that state's power utility, at its Redhawk
   plant. Another test is planned in Louisiana.

   GreenFuel claims that over the course of a year, a hectare (2.5 acres)
   of its reactors should be able to produce 30,000 litres (8,000
   American gallons) of oil, which could be used as biodiesel, and enough
   carbohydrates to be fermented into 9,000 litres of ethanol, which can
   be used as a substitute for petrol.

   There is, of course, no free lunch. As Rob Carlson of the University
   of Washington points out, if money is to be made selling products made
   from exhaust gas, then that gas goes from being waste matter to being
   a valuable resource. Far from giving it away, power companies might
   even start charging for it. That would, indeed, be a reversal of
   fortune.

