
   Teenage gangs are deadly but surprisingly flimsy

   TEXTING someone else's girlfriend, gatecrashing a party, hailing the
   wrong person in the street: these innocuous offences are all said to
   have provided teenagers with motives for murder. Four fatal stabbings
   and one shooting shocked London this week, while in Manchester a
   19-year-old was jailed for blasting a youth in a trivial row. A
   recurring factor, besides senselessness, was gang membership.

                                               London Police Press Bureau
                                               London Police Press Bureau

                                 Martin Dinnegan: killed, and for nothing

   How many young people belong to gangs? When the Home Office last
   counted in 2004, it found that 6% of 10-to-19-year-olds belonged to a
   "delinquent youth group". Membership was highest among those aged 14
   and 15, of whom 12% were signed up. But most members were tame. The
   Home Office's understanding of delinquency includes smoking cannabis
   and "frightening people", which some teenagers do without trying.
   Fewer than a third of them were frequent offenders, and only one in
   eight had carried a knife. Gunmen numbered fewer than one in 100.

   Nonetheless, flares of sickening violence are making people wonder how
   prolific this mad, bad minority must be. Much teenage crime slips
   under the radar because victims under 16 are ignored by the British
   Crime Survey (BCS), the government's favoured index. But police
   figures unearthed by the Tories show that 29% of mugging victims last
   year were 11-to-16-year-olds. Some 40% of the alleged perpetrators
   were themselves under 16. And some say the BCS underestimates violent
   crime--by 45%, according to a report on June 26th from Civitas, a
   think-tank.

   Gangs are not the cause of this youth offending, argues Enver Solomon
   of King's College, London. "There's some evidence that young people
   will act with another when approaching someone to pinch their iPod.
   But it's usually in ones and twos, not packs," he says. And some child
   "robbers" are just old-fashioned bullies, he points out: the
   difference now is that they nick mobile phones, not sweets.

   Bullying may be as far as many young louts go. But gang membership
   exposes them to disproportionate risks. "In a gang of 30 you might
   have one or two who are particularly hard or a bit crazy, who might
   use firearms or do a series of robberies," says Robert Ralphs of
   Manchester University, who has interviewed gunmen as young as 14. Most
   members may only deal a little cannabis, but their association with
   the hard cases makes them targets for rival gangs looking to settle
   scores.

   The consequence is that even minor players get armed. Mum's kitchen is
   a good starting point. But even firearms are within reach. New
   handguns, smuggled from Europe by car or in the post, are scarce and
   cost up to £500 ($1,000). But once fired they are a liability that
   older gangsters gratefully offload to teenagers for as little as £50.
   Police seizures suggest that more than half the guns on the streets
   are converted (and dangerous) replicas, a fact to which many younger
   gangsters seem oblivious.

   Control of the lucrative drug trade once made the danger seem
   worthwhile. Bristol's worst gang violence erupted in 2003, when
   Jamaican newcomers clashed with British Afro-Caribbeans for control of
   the local crack-cocaine market. Inspector Dave Bradnock, who helped to
   put the kingpins behind bars, says the old gangs are less active now.
   The "Aggi crew", once key players, are out of prison but seem to have
   hung up their weapons.

   Good policing is one reason, but drug dealing has also become less
   appealing. The relentless spread of drugs means in most cities it is
   impossible for one gang to control supply. Average prices have fallen:
   ecstasy tablets, for example, now cost less than a third what they did
   a decade ago. Mr Ralphs says the impact on gangs is obvious. Walking
   around with older ex-gang members is "like being out with David
   Beckham. People stop to shake their hand." The current generation
   makes a sorry contrast. "They say they make £1,000 a week, but they
   have to put their money together to buy a £20 bag of weed."

   It is hard to imagine anyone choosing such a wretched life. In fact,
   it seems few choose it at all. The Home Office found that most gangs
   had no leader and only a third even had a name (Bristol's "Aggi" crew,
   sweetly, is named after its founders' initials). The only common
   feature, mentioned by nine gang members out of ten, was a regular
   territory or meeting place. If this is a gang's only durable
   characteristic, breaking it up ought to be as simple as providing
   somewhere better for young people to hang around.

   Understanding the makeup of gangs also counts. A report last month
   from the Metropolitan Police Authority described community anti-gang
   efforts as "almost exclusively focused" on Afro-Caribbeans. Yet of 171
   current London gangs, only half were predominantly black, it pointed
   out. Martin Dinnegan, the white 14-year-old stabbed to death on June
   26th, was not everyone's idea of a typical gang victim. If people can
   realise his case is not so unusual, there may be fewer like him.

