
                                                             Getty Images

                                Getty Images

   Despite the summer's plagues, farming looks surprisingly healthy

   GORDON BROWN has not been short of crises since becoming prime
   minister, with everything from incompetent terrorist plots to
   record-breaking floods to contend with. The most recent began on
   August 3rd, when cows at a farm near Guildford, in southern England,
   tested positive for foot-and-mouth disease, a contagious and
   debilitating sickness that mainly affects cloven-hooved animals.

   Britons, an urban people, do not as a rule know much about the
   ailments of livestock, but foot-and-mouth is an exception. The
   previous outbreak, in 2001, was disastrous. Government inaction
   allowed the disease to spread so far that, when steps were at last
   taken to halt it, large swathes of the country had to be closed off.
   The sheer quantity of animal corpses, slaughtered to halt the spread
   of the disease, meant that the army had to help with their disposal
   atop vast, smoking pyres. The total cost, including compensation, was
   eventually put at around £8 billion ($16.2 billion, at today's
   exchange rates).

   This time things look very different. As The Economist went to press,
   the infection seemed confined to two farms in Surrey, with a third
   being tested. The confusion that helped the 2001 crisis to spiral out
   of control was absent. The Department for Environment, Food and Rural
   Affairs (successor to the Ministry of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food,
   which, along with the cows, did not survive the previous outbreak)
   quarantined the farms immediately. Sick animals were culled, livestock
   movements were banned (though later relaxed) and exports halted. Mr
   Brown cut short his holiday to convene the government's snazzily-named
   COBRA emergency committee. Even the European Union praised the
   government's promptness.

   The working hypothesis is that the virus escaped from a nearby
   biological laboratory, where it is used in research and in the
   manufacture of vaccines (see [3]article). The strain found in the
   Surrey cows is an unusual one, and matches exactly a variant used at
   the laboratory.

   Although the outbreak seems to have been contained, it has caused
   plenty of trouble for British livestock farmers. With animal movements
   banned, the meat business is at a standstill. Trade shows and farmers'
   markets are empty; only abattoirs have reopened. The English Beef and
   Lamb Executive reckons the export ban--which will be lifted three
   months after the last case of the disease is confirmed--is costing the
   industry £10m a week.

   The foot-and-mouth outbreak is the latest in a series of
   well-publicised setbacks for farmers. Chaos last summer at the Rural
   Payments Agency, charged with distributing £3 billion of European
   agricultural subsidies, prevented thousands from receiving their cash.
   This year's flooding has drowned crops and spoiled harvests: officials
   reckon that up to a third of Britain's pea crop was ruined, and potato
   and broccoli harvests have suffered too. Even the public has turned
   against farmers, opposing a call by the National Farmers' Union (NFU)
   for a cull of badgers which, the NFU says, transmit tuberculosis to
   cattle.

   Yet despite this dolorous litany, farmers have been doing fairly well
   in recent years. Agriculture is, notoriously, a boom-and-bust
   industry, and the general trend over the past few decades has
   certainly been downwards. A boom in the mid-90s, fuelled by a happy
   alignment of weak sterling (which boosted the value of subsidies from
   the EU and helped exports) and high commodity prices, ended abruptly
   as the pound recovered and BSE, another cattle disease, flared up. But
   farm incomes today are 59% up from their recent nadir in 2000, and
   they rose by around 7% last year. Officials were reckoning recently
   that they would keep rising for several years.

   Those predictions were made before the floods and the appearance of
   foot-and-mouth disease, but there are, nevertheless, good reasons for
   optimism. British agriculture is resilient. Average farm incomes grew
   nicely in 2001, despite the severity of the foot-and-mouth outbreak,
   and that is without counting the enormous £1.1 billion in compensation
   (equal to around half the industry's total income that year) that the
   powerful NFU managed to get for those affected. Indeed, for all the
   wailing, the brunt of the cost was borne not by farmers but by other
   rural businesses, such as pubs and hotels, which were not compensated
   for trade lost while the countryside was closed to the public.

   Despite recent blows, farming is in reasonably good shape these days.
   That is partly down to tight supply in the world market, says Carmen
   Suarez, chief economist at the NFU, citing the drought in Australia,
   which is a big agricultural producer. Others point to America's
   new-found enthusiasm for biofuels, which is diverting land from food
   production to fuel-making. Demand is rising, too, thanks to rapidly
   growing incomes in India and other countries in Asia: as people get
   richer, they consume more animal-based protein, which means either
   meat or milk products.

   The upshot has been a boom in the prices of agricultural commodities,
   with dairy products rising as much as 60% since the start of this year
   and wheat at an 11-year high. Commodity prices take several months to
   feed through to farmers themselves, admits Sean Rickard, a lecturer at
   the Cranfield School of Management, but "if you combine biofuel
   production with growth in the Far East, there's every reason to
   believe that agricultural markets will be tight for quite some time."

   Of course, averages disguise as much as they reveal, and news of high
   food prices will be scant consolation to those farmers worst hit by
   flooding or foot-and-mouth. But even here there is a silver lining.
   "Income is only one measure of prosperity," says Mr Rickard. "You've
   got to consider asset wealth as well." Agricultural land prices are
   rising fast, and have risen by around 50% since 2003, thanks to
   confidence in the industry's future and to rich-but-disillusioned City
   slickers looking for a slice of rural idyll to retire to, or at least
   to spend their weekends in. Foreigners are taking an interest too,
   with farmers from other parts of Europe attracted by prices lower than
   those at home. For any British farmer thinking of selling up, now
   looks like a tempting time.

