
   After months of prevarication Gordon Brown must settle the bank's fate




   IF FINANCE were art, the slow-motion demise of Northern Rock would
   surely belong to the surrealist school. Magritte's enigmatic picture
   of a smoker's pipe, captioned "This is not a pipe", deserves pride of
   place at the mortgage lender's Newcastle head office. This is a bank,
   after all, that is supposedly still in private hands and solvent, even
   though it is propped up by breathtaking amounts of public money. The
   painting also merits a place at Downing Street, as ministers chase in
   diminishing circles to maintain the surrealist tease that "This is not
   a publicly owned bank".

   An extraordinary--in both senses of the word--meeting of Northern
   Rock's shareholders on January 15th added a scene from the theatre of
   the absurd. Held at Newcastle's Metro Radio Arena, which was playing
   host later in the week to the "Ultimate Fighting Championship", the
   meeting was an attempt by two hedge funds, which own 18% of the bank,
   to assert shareholders' interests. Their goal was to restrict the
   board's ability to resolve Northern Rock's difficulties by issuing new
   shares or selling assets. In the event, only one of their four
   resolutions was adopted.

   Even as shareholders voted, however, the stockmarket was passing
   judgment on their brazen assumption that they were still in charge. In
   February last year Northern Rock's share price touched £12.58
   ($24.77), valuing the bank at more than £5 billion; on the day of the
   meeting the price fell by 16% to 69p. And with reason. Shareholders'
   shrivelled equity is now worth less than £300m, whereas public
   financial backing for Northern Rock--£25 billion in lending by the
   Bank of England and another £30 billion in Treasury guarantees--totals
   £55 billion. Taxpayers' total exposure amounts to at least half of
   Northern Rock's balance sheet.

   By refusing to handcuff the bank's board, shareholders kept open the
   possibility of a private-sector rescue, which Alistair Darling, the
   chancellor of the exchequer, said again on January 15th was his
   preferred option. Yet that evening Gordon Brown, the prime minister,
   gave his strongest hint so far that Northern Rock might be
   nationalised. Its share price slipped further the following day.

   The government faces this stark choice--between finding a fully
   financed private-sector saviour (which now looks increasingly
   elusive), taking the bank into public ownership or just letting it go
   bust--because it failed to prepare for a banking belly-flop in a
   changed financial world. Not so long ago the Bank of England could
   have orchestrated a rescue by Britain's top banks. But today's more
   open and competitive financial environment requires a new way of
   dealing with banking emergencies.

   Britain is the only country in the G7 club of leading economies
   without a special public mechanism for grabbing control of a failing
   bank and ensuring that depositors get their money without delay. The
   government is now planning to give such powers to regulators at the
   Financial Services Authority, but these will come too late to help
   Northern Rock. If it were to become insolvent, deposits could well be
   frozen despite the Treasury's guarantees.

   This failure to reform before banking disaster struck is now costing
   the government dear. Private-sector saviours are proving thin on the
   ground. Several firms, including J.C. Flowers, an American
   private-equity company experienced in sorting out ailing financial
   institutions, initially expressed interest in this one. But only two
   contenders are still in the ring. One is a consortium led by Sir
   Richard Branson's Virgin Group, which would take a controlling
   interest in the bank. The other is Olivant Advisors, a
   private-investment firm headed by Luqman Arnold, formerly the boss of
   a rival bank, Abbey National. Olivant proposes taking a minority stake
   in Northern Rock and turning it around through better management.

   Both would-be rescuers are stumbling over the same hurdle, however.
   Each has promised swift repayment to the Bank of England of a sizeable
   chunk of its lending: Virgin has promised £11 billion and Olivant
   between £10 billion and £15 billion. But the money must be borrowed to
   fulfil that pledge, and the financial crisis of the past few months
   has left banks both short of capital and leery of risk, especially as
   the mortgage market turns down.

   Time is now running short. Mr Darling has set a deadline of February
   for any private-sector solution, in part because European Union
   approval for the current package of state support lasts for only six
   months. At the end of last year the Treasury asked Goldman Sachs, an
   investment bank, to explore whether it could raise the necessary
   private finance where others had failed. Goldman's apparent delay in
   presenting a final report suggests that it has been unable to crack
   the nut.

   That leaves nationalisation as the only remaining remedy, and it is an
   unpalatable one. The government has been preparing the ground: on
   January 12th it emerged that Ron Sandler, who sorted out the Lloyds's
   of London insurance market a decade ago, will take charge of Northern
   Rock if it is nationalised. Taking the bank into public hands would
   nonetheless be politically embarrassing for Mr Brown, who has been as
   keen as Tony Blair for Labour to shed its reputation as the party of
   state ownership. And it would probably mean breaking one of his
   self-imposed fiscal rules, as at least half the bank's liabilities
   would move on to the public books. But where Northern Rock is
   concerned, a dose of realism is long overdue.

