
   History and personality have hamstrung Gordon Brown. But he is
   not--yet--as fated as John Major



   [3]Gordon Brown

   STUN the pig, hang it up by its trotters and slice it open. Decant
   some blood, pull out the organs and other unwanted bits, then squeeze
   them into a tube of scraped intestine.

   Sausages are indeed harder to swallow if you know how they are made.
   So, Bismarck famously observed, are laws. The same might be said of
   Gordon Brown's premiership--because, alas, it looks as if many of the
   unappetising things said about him before he became prime minister are
   true (and, as Mr Brown's luck would have it, they were said again in a
   documentary series starring his predecessor that began airing this
   week).

   It is true, or seems to be, that Mr Brown is maniacally ambitious but
   politically timid. He is intellectually curious but cripplingly
   indecisive. Witness the barrage of procrastinating policy reviews that
   he unleashes in every speech; unsurprisingly, more were set up this
   week, after the tragicomic loss of two doomsday discs by the revenue
   and customs service (HMRC). It is true, as the uncharitable gave
   warning, that Mr Brown copes badly with criticism--so badly, it turns
   out, that he sometimes shakes with pain and rage. He appoints
   supposedly independent ministers, then bullies them into line-toeing
   submission. He shies from blame when it is due and sucks up credit
   when it is not.

   Unfortunately, the gristle and the guts--the ugly secrets of the Brown
   abattoir--have been gruesomely displayed for all to see. During the
   non-election fiasco in October, the country witnessed the low
   political calculation and fake ecumenicism, the shallow bombast and
   obfuscation, the indecision and ultimately the cowardice. In the first
   days of the Northern Rock crisis, it saw--or rather didn't see--Mr
   Brown hide behind the sofa that he kept in Number 10 when Tony Blair
   left, just as he kept the uncollegial approach to government
   associated with it. Those who thought he could shuffle off his old
   skin when he realised his prime-ministerial dream, or at least that
   his psychological tics would not warp his tenure, seem to have been
   wrong. For Mr Brown, perhaps personality is destiny after all.

   Just as ineluctably, history seems to be his destiny too. Mr Brown's
   pitch was that, as prime minister, he would offer a change, not only
   from his own earlier incarnation but also from the previous decade of
   Labour rule. For a while the strategy was surprisingly successful; it
   has now comprehensively collapsed. The truly damaging thing about the
   HMRC fiasco is not that it undermines Mr Brown's claims to have
   governed competently since June. It is that, like the ongoing
   embarrassment over Northern Rock (which is partly to be blamed on the
   regulatory system Mr Brown designed), it has reminded the public of
   Labour's chequered record, and of Mr Brown's role in it. This is an
   old and flawed government, these debacles remind people--and the
   architect of some of those flaws is now leading it.

   So there is no escape from the past. Between them, it now seems to
   many, history and personality have scuppered Mr Brown's
   administration. He and Labour have accumulated too many mistakes and
   behaved too distastefully, some think, like John Major's cabinet in
   the mid-1990s (though it was the personality of Sir John's complacent
   party rather than his own that was the main problem then). Sooner or
   later--and probably as late as possible--Mr Brown will be spat out by
   a general election. But, runs the increasingly conventional wisdom,
   after this week, with voters' trust forfeited, the media derisive and
   whispering about his leadership under way, he is probably done for
   already.

   He may be. But there are three reasons to think otherwise.

   First, Mr Brown has not yet conclusively failed the first test of all
   prime ministers: the Hippocratic one. Northern Rock may prove
   financially catastrophic; the lost discs may yet result in
   inconveniences that upset voters irrevocably. But Mr Brown has not
   presided over any cast-iron disasters or lethal scandals. This was a
   dark week, but it was no Black Wednesday.

   Second, for all his faults and the virtues of David Cameron, the Tory
   leader, it is far too soon to conclude that the preference for Mr
   Cameron evident in recent opinion polls is fixed. The two men have yet
   to face off in anything resembling normal political circumstances,
   with no election furore or freakish mishaps. Mr Cameron is not yet the
   inevitable prime minister that Mr Blair seemed soon after he became
   Labour leader in 1994; compared with Sir John, Mr Brown has a big
   parliamentary majority and a relatively united party behind him. All
   that may change: Mr Cameron's poll lead may stabilise or widen,
   especially if the economic outlook and public finances deteriorate, as
   they seem likely to. But even then, Mr Brown could still turn out to
   be a good prime minister.

   Eat up, or no dessert

   Political leaders can be successful in two ways, which do not always
   go together and sometimes even contradict each other: they can win
   lots of elections, or they can leave their country better off, one way
   or another, than when they took charge of it. Mr Brown will have less
   fair circumstances and almost certainly less time than Mr Blair did to
   change Britain. But beneath the bluster and mishaps, he is showing at
   least an appetite for taking on some of the most intractable problems
   of social policy--such as the fact that too many pupils leave school
   with no qualifications, and that too many people expensively claim
   incapacity benefit. Probably he will fail to solve them, as Labour has
   done until now. But he is at least trying. He truly wants to spread
   opportunity more fairly (all those mute inglorious Himmelfarbs...). He
   is tentatively but admirably beginning to rebalance Britain's skewed
   constitution.

   Two months ago, when Mr Brown seemed able to turn flood waters into
   wine, it would have seemed absurd to be thinking in these terms. But
   now it is worth remembering: there may still be some wholesome meat
   left in Mr Brown's sausage.

