


   Britain's wayward yoof is an old problem, but a problem all the same

   ONE evening, when Bagehot was at university, a student who lived next
   door to him fell badly ill. An ambulance was called, but its route was
   blocked by a pile of clothes and a gaggle of drunk, naked young men.
   They were members of a drinking society (roughly analogous to American
   fraternities). The boozy nudity at precisely this spot, they
   explained, refusing to budge, was an awfully important initiation
   rite.

   This incident came to mind last month when something not dissimilar
   happened near Wigan, in northern England. A group of youths obstructed
   an ambulance and harassed the paramedics in it, whose patient died.
   That little act of thuggery was scarcely noticed amid the ongoing run
   of murders by British youngsters, by knife and sometimes gun. Most of
   the victims have been young too: 18 people aged 18 or under have been
   killed in London this year, stabbed on the street or shot in
   nightclubs--not many by Los Angeles standards, perhaps, but troubling
   by Britain's. Not all the victims have been teenagers: a father in
   Warrington was beaten to death outside his home last week after
   remonstrating with vandals. "No street is safe any more from marauding
   hooligans," lamented the Sun, which recently fulminated about the yobs
   who urinated in drinking-water supplies delivered to flood-stricken
   western England.

   Are British delinquents really more depraved, and more numerous, than
   they used to be, or than other countries' are? That university
   prank--as well as confirming that the posh and plebeian classes can be
   oddly alike--suggests that there is little new under the sun, even if
   the Sun says there is. Hysteria over degenerate children was even more
   intense in 1993, when two ten-year-olds murdered a toddler in
   Liverpool. From punks and skinheads, through the gangs that prowled
   the post-war London rubble and beyond, "yoof" has always been a
   concern, and always getting worse. "I would there were no age between
   sixteen and three-and-twenty," says a Shakespearean character, "for
   there is nothing in the between but getting wenches with child,
   wronging the ancientry, stealing, fighting." It is true that more
   teenage British wenches are got with child than other European ones,
   and that British teenagers are unusually prone to taking drugs,
   fighting, venereal disease and boozing: a senior policeman called this
   week for tighter rules on alcohol. But few who drink or smoke pot
   graduate to knife crime. Many do none of these things; most are
   better-off and better-educated than ever.

   Not much has changed--and don't generalise: those are the relaxed
   arguments of some sociologists, criminologists and other
   yoof-ologists. But an old problem still counts as a problem; that
   Britons have always worried about yoof doesn't mean they are wrong to
   do so now. And conversations with teachers, youth workers and yoof
   itself suggest that in some ways the plight and behaviour of teenagers
   have indeed deteriorated.

   Hard evidence is difficult to come by, but more British teenagers seem
   to be carrying knives, intended to protect but liable to endanger.
   More assaults than previously seem to be provoked by imagined
   "disrespect"; afterwards, a teenage omerta often confounds the police.
   Murder is still overwhelmingly a male offence, but girls seem to be
   committing more violent crime too. Urban gangs are pursuing rivalries
   and vendettas against groups from other neighbourhoods, separated by
   boundaries that are invisible to oblivious adults. "Happy-slapping",
   whereby assailants film their attacks for their later amusement, has
   been an unanticipated consequence of putting cameras on mobile phones.

   As in America, the worst problems are often concentrated in specific
   communities. But they have wider costs, because adults can't tell the
   sociopaths from the bored loiterers. British adults, research
   suggests, are less likely to intervene than other Europeans if they
   see youngsters up to no good, with the result that parks and squares
   are turned over to adolescent rule.

   Only relate, relatives

   Naturally, the -ologists have lots of explanations, and the government
   lots of remedies. Some see youthful misbehaviour as the cost of
   progress--for example, as a by-product of affluence, which in
   combination with inequality has produced a rump of poor and resentful
   children. Another mostly benign trend, in Britain as elsewhere, is the
   elongation of adolescence, as many youngsters spend longer in
   education, unmarried and at home; the dark corollary of that, for some
   of the stubbornly large number of British kids who leave school with
   few or no qualifications, and who no longer go straight into a factory
   or trade, is a risky limbo period before they settle down. Other
   explanations finger parents, for getting divorced more than they used
   to, for absconding or for working long hours, all of which Britons are
   unusually inclined to do.

   Yet it seems to Bagehot that there is something else peculiar to
   British families, at least among Europeans--an oddity that is
   especially salient at this time of year. Visitors to piazzas or plazas
   are likely to see several generations of continental families happily
   talking, eating and even dancing together. British children, by
   contrast, spend relatively little time with their parents, and not
   only because the parents aren't around: many see fraternising with
   them in public as a fate worse than a mobile phone without a camera.
   Meanwhile, as that senior policeman complained this week, many British
   parents, whether there are one or two of them, seem indifferent to
   their children's antics, or incurious about them. Since the clubs and
   churches that once thrust them together have withered, unrelated
   youngsters and older people don't talk much either.

   The British are an emotionally unforthcoming lot in general; perhaps
   this intergenerational chasm should be seen as just an extreme form of
   the privacy and reserve that mark many British relationships. But it
   is a dangerous one.

