
   Collapsing markets suggest a mini-subprime crisis in the making


   FROM up high, London is a picture of vigorous renewal. In just about
   every direction, construction cranes point contemplatively to the
   skies. They also point to the great boom that has taken place in
   commercial property in recent years. The collapse of that boom, which
   now threatens to slash the values of these gleaming office towers and
   destroy the savings of millions, may pose almost as great a threat to
   Britain's banking system as the subprime crisis that has been roiling
   financial markets since late in 2007.

   Bubbles are most easily seen with hindsight, but this one was in plain
   view even as it inflated. In 2004 and 2005 British office prices rose
   at an average rate of 10% a year before jumping 17% in 2006, according
   to IPD, a data provider. Rental yields fell, meanwhile, to below the
   cost of borrowing in late 2006. By the middle of last year, with rents
   rising and buildings bursting at their seams, frenzied buying had
   pushed up prices and widened the gap between yields and borrowing
   costs to 1.7 percentage points.

   Developers, too, overcame their caution at just the wrong moment. Many
   had burnt their fingers on speculative towers in the 1990s. So for the
   first half of this decade, few landlords started pouring foundations
   until they had signed up elevator-loads of dependable tenants.

   Yet, with the impeccably bad timing the industry is known for,
   construction boomed just as the market was peaking. CB Richard Ellis,
   a consultancy, reckons that new offices are being built in London at
   their fastest rate in nearly two decades. Most of the ones going up
   this year have yet to find tenants (see chart), and not all will, for
   the freeze in credit markets has spread to City payrolls. Law firms
   stopped hiring in the third quarter of last year, and banks are sure
   to do the same soon.

   Rents in London's financial district, which CBRE says rose by 22% in
   the 12 months to the end of September 2007, will probably fall by
   about 5% this year, according to John Fraser-Andrews of HSBC, a bank.
   And although a decline in commercial-property prices was inevitable,
   its ferocity has taken many by surprise. In November the value of
   commercial properties dipped by about 4%, their largest monthly drop
   on record. CBRE reckons that commercial properties are worth about 9%
   less now than they were at their peak in July. Capital Economics, a
   consultancy, thinks their value may have slipped by some 15%.

   Yet even so prices may have a long way to fall. Tim Bond of Barclays
   Bank says the derivatives markets are forecasting the biggest collapse
   in commercial-property prices since the second world war--a fall of up
   to 30% over the next three years. In 1989-92, when property last took
   a tremendous tumble, values plunged by about 27%, according to the
   Bank of England.

   Such a fall could wreak havoc on Britain's banks, which are already
   smarting from losses on investments backed by mortgage loans in
   America to borrowers with spotty credit records (subprime loans). The
   Bank of England frets that by the end of the third quarter British
   bank loans to commercial-property companies had increased to £186
   billion, or about 9% of domestic lending. This is a higher proportion
   than during the last big bust, when collapsing property prices
   contributed to the closure or failure of 25 small banks and helped
   cause an economic downturn.

   The European Central Bank, meanwhile, worries about the proliferation
   of credit derivatives and securities backed by mortgages on commercial
   properties in Britain and America. These, says Ian Harnett of Absolute
   Strategy Research, a consultancy, may end up posing as great a risk to
   the financial system as securities based on American subprime
   residential mortgages, which brought the world's financial system to
   its knees in August.

   Others are more sanguine, mainly because, however much banks have lent
   to commercial-property firms, they have handed out still more to
   homeowners. Mr Bond, for instance, thinks that the fall in property
   prices in Britain may force banks to write off 2-3% of the value of
   their commercial-property loans over the next few years. At worst, he
   says, the meltdown in that market will cause only about a quarter as
   much damage as defaults on bad residential mortgages. Not really a
   comforting thought.

