
   It's not when you imbibe but how much that counts

   VOMIT and broken glass are as much a part of the festive season in
   binge-prone Britain as are crackers and tinsel. This year, though,
   drinkers took the customary bender further than usual. Calls to
   ambulance services in the first four hours of 2008 rose dramatically:
   in London, for example, by 16% on the same period in 2007, and by 30%
   on 2006. Those caught in the crossfire took evasive action: some
   churches held "midnight" mass as early as 6pm on Christmas Eve to
   avoid drunken interruptions; some councils brought forward their New
   Year's Eve firework displays, or cancelled them altogether.

   These excesses did little to convince critics of the licensing-law
   changes in 2005--which allowed pubs to stay open past the old closing
   time of 11pm, even around the clock--that the country is acquiring the
   less sodden, continental-style drinking culture that the
   liberalisation was supposed to foster. Doctors' and patients' groups,
   which had opposed the move in the first place, are calling once more
   for the government to backtrack.

   Last year it looked as if opponents of looser licensing laws would get
   their way. The puritanical new prime minister, Gordon Brown, threw out
   plans for a supercasino, promised to rethink the decision to downgrade
   cannabis and said that he "would not hesitate" to tighten the
   alcohol-licensing rules once more if a review of the new regime
   warranted it.

   But they now seem likely to be disappointed. That review, due soon,
   will probably recommend only a few tweaks. There will be tougher
   measures to curb under-age drinking, and harsher penalties for rowdy
   venues, but no return to last orders. Although ending the race to
   drink up before closing time has not moderated drinking habits,
   neither have apocalyptic predictions come to pass. Violence fuelled by
   alcohol has remained broadly stable, with slightly fewer incidents
   around 11pm, when tanked-up hordes used to pour out onto the streets,
   and slightly more in the wee hours.

   That may be because 24-hour drinking is almost nowhere the reality.
   Most premises have extended their licences by only an hour or so. Only
   3% are open around the clock, and two-thirds of them are hotels, which
   were entitled to 24-hour licences under the previous regime.

   The battleground is now shifting from the mean streets to suburban
   living rooms. There has been a long-term rise in the number of Britons
   drinking enough to damage their health: 4,144 deaths were caused by
   alcohol in 1991; by 2005 that had more than doubled to 8,386. Many are
   middle-class and middle-aged folk who would never dream of taking a
   swing at a fellow boozer, but regularly polish off a bottle or two of
   wine at home with dinner.

   Those who campaign for shorter pub-opening hours also want higher
   taxes on alcohol and a crackdown on happy hours and supermarkets'
   special offers. Here they may make more progress. In December MPs
   debated the consequences for the country's health of cheap alcohol;
   much time was spent castigating supermarkets for selling booze below
   cost, and one MP dubbed Sir Terry Leahy, the boss of Tesco, the
   "godfather of British binge drinking".

   Just before Christmas the Office for National Statistics had more bad
   news for bourgeois boozers: it has, apparently, been under-counting
   the Britons who drink to excess. Figures to be published later this
   month will take into account the trend towards stronger wines and
   larger wine glasses. Those whose New Year's resolutions include
   cutting down may wish to note that a large glass of high-alcohol wine
   comes in at a whopping three units.

