
   Developing countries attract migrants too

   THE complaints sound familiar. Foreigners steal our jobs. Aliens cause
   a rise in crime. The corrupt interior ministry cannot cope. The border
   is ineffective and deporting illegal migrants does not work: removed
   by train, they return on foot. Outsiders put a strain on housing,
   especially for the poor, and on hospitals and schools. But employers
   do not care: farmers want cheap labour, and rich families need skilful
   foreign gardeners and housekeepers.

                                                                  Reuters

                                  Reuters

                        Turfed out of Little London 

   Residents of Soweto, or other urban areas in South Africa, are likely
   to grumble about foreigners in the same way as in rich countries. The
   makwerekwere, as African foreigners are insultingly known, are
   attracted by South Africa's relative wealth. Some Tanzanians talk
   longingly of Johannesburg as "Little London". One in four Little
   Londoners may now be a foreigner. Zimbabwean teachers, forced out by
   hunger and repression, work as security guards and shop assistants.
   Congolese lawyers toil as waiters and chefs.

   In 2005 two World Bank researchers, Mr Ratha and William Shaw,
   estimated that two in five migrants--about 78m people--were outside
   rich countries. But who in the poor world is counting? South Africa's
   government does not know how many foreigners it has (2m? 5m? more?).
   Mexico, India or Turkey cannot be sure either. Total numbers are
   skewed by those displaced by the collapse of the Soviet Union or who
   became de facto migrants when borders moved.

   Ms Newland of the Migration Policy Institute in Washington, DC, says
   the flows between poor and mid-income countries are huge but
   "desperately understudied". One reason why outsiders pay little
   attention is that most poor migrants do not move far. Roughly half of
   all South-East Asian migrants are thought to have remained in the
   neighbourhood, and nearly two-thirds of migrants from eastern Europe
   and Central Asia have stayed in their own region. Nearly 70% of
   migrants from sub-Saharan Africa remain on their continent. West
   African countries do not limit immigration from their neighbours, so
   lots of people cross borders, for example from Ghana to oil-rich
   Nigeria.

   Some middle-income countries, such as Morocco, Mexico, Turkey and
   Libya, are well-trodden transit routes with migrant populations of
   their own. A senior civil servant in Morocco laments that his country
   is "between the hammer and the anvil" of Africa and Europe. Others,
   like India, Russia, South Africa and Argentina, are destinations in
   their own right. With all this come the same opportunities and threats
   as in the rich world. Chile imports doctors and maids from Peru,
   raising worries about a brain drain. Zambians fret about an invasion
   by Chinese, whose numbers in Africa are said to be between 80,000 to
   400,000, many in oil-rich countries such as Sudan, Nigeria and Angola.

   Remittances from one low-income country to another probably help to
   cut poverty. A 2006 study of 4,700 households by the Southern African
   Migration Project found that 40% of Zimbabwean households received
   some money from this source. How much is hard to measure, but a World
   Bank estimate for 2006 gives a range for remittances among poor
   countries of $17 billion-55 billion.

   Some middle-income countries are extraordinarily welcoming. Venezuela,
   awash with oil revenues, even allows Colombians to use its
   social-welfare system. Argentina has lifted most restrictions on
   immigration from South America, again guaranteeing access to public
   health and education, even for illegal migrants. But many other
   countries show signs of xenophobia. On one occasion a newspaper in
   Morocco gave warning that "black locusts"--African migrants--were
   invading. Russian authorities, especially in Moscow, regularly throw
   out traders from Georgia and elsewhere in the Caucasus. Libya
   occasionally expels African migrants.

   Many poor people are drawn to somewhat less poor countries in the hope
   of finding work, just as they are to rich countries. But with war,
   repression and economic collapse, push factors are much stronger in
   the poor world. The invasion of Iraq in 2003, and the violence since,
   has uprooted more than 4m Iraqis. Some 95% of them have remained in
   the Middle East, including 2m in hard-pressed Jordan and Syria.
   Sweden, with an admirable history of taking in refugees, has welcomed
   23,600 Iraqis, but few other rich countries have followed suit. Some
   of the displaced are beginning to return home. Since the Taliban were
   booted from power in 2001, Afghanistan has seen the voluntary return
   of at least 3.2m people from Pakistan, Iran and elsewhere.

   Climate of fear

   Could a changing climate cause similarly big ebbs and flows?
   Scientists agree that average temperatures are likely to rise
   significantly by the end of this century. Rainfall patterns are
   already shifting. Those in marginal areas, for example on the edges of
   deserts, will suffer most, along with those in countries with the
   least resources to adapt. The sea is also rising, which might mean
   floods on vulnerable coasts. Some 12% of Africa's urban population,
   and 18% of Asia's, live in low-lying coastal zones and may be exposed
   to extreme weather or floods. The Intergovernmental Panel on Climate
   Change suggested in 2007 that millions may face water shortages,
   hunger and flooding as a result of climate shifts. Some would migrate,
   although probably over a period of time.

   Environmental change has already set off some migration. Because the
   Sahel region gets much less rain than it did a century ago, farmers in
   Mali are moving to the cities. According to the UN Environment
   Programme, over the past four decades the desert in Sudan has crept
   south by about 100km and forests have disappeared. Rainfall in north
   Darfur, in Sudan, has dropped by a third over the past 80 years.

   All this has displaced people and, some believe, encouraged war.
   Morocco's government is anxious about it. "There is a direct impact on
   migration. You see people leaving sub-Saharan Africa in search of more
   habitable land," says Mr Ameur, the minister for Moroccans abroad.
   Abdelhay Moudden, a migration expert in Rabat, suggests that the first
   to leave may be struggling farmers: "If the urban economy cannot
   absorb them, then it may also push international migration."

   A 2005 report by the Institute for Environment and Human Security in
   Bonn suggested that rising seas and extreme weather, among other
   things, could uproot 150m people by 2050. Ms Newland of the Migration
   Policy Institute cautions against talking up the figures, but thinks
   that if drought and rising temperatures cause crop yields to fall in,
   say, the Sahel, they will probably encourage migration. If climate
   change were to cause wars or spread disease, that could compound the
   effects. Another reason, then, to switch to low-energy light bulbs.

