
                                                            Steve O'Brien

                               Steve O'Brien

   After the roughest of starts, things no longer look quite so dire for
   Sir Menzies Campbell

   NOBODY can say that Sir Menzies Campbell has had an easy first year as
   leader of his party. As poisoned chalices go, the leadership of the
   Liberal Democrats 12 months ago resembled something rustled up by
   Lucrezia Borgia on one of her more vengeful days. Yet this weekend
   many of the Lib Dems gathering in Harrogate for their spring
   conference sense that they may be closer to real power than at any
   time in living memory.

   When Sir Menzies (or Ming, as he prefers to be known) took over, the
   Lib Dems were reeling from two months of public self-destruction.
   Their previous leader, the popular but chaotic Charles Kennedy, had
   been pushed out by exasperated colleagues after belatedly confessing
   that he was an alcoholic. Mr Kennedy's supporters blamed Sir Menzies
   for planning the coup, unfairly dubbing him "Ming the Merciless".

   After revelations about their private lives undermined two contenders,
   Sir Menzies, supported by the party establishment, won less
   convincingly than expected against the relatively unknown Chris Huhne.
   During the campaign, his stately manner and at times slightly
   tremulous voice had made him seem old for his 64 years. He was also
   clearly uncomfortable dealing with domestic policy after a long period
   of specialising in foreign affairs.

   Nor did things immediately improve. At the weekly House of Commons
   bear-pit of prime minister's questions (PMQs) Sir Menzies was inept,
   his notes grasped in visibly shaking hands. Comparisons with the
   assured performances of the much younger Tory leader, David Cameron,
   were painful, as were bumbling attempts by Sir Menzies to suggest a
   familiarity with popular culture that had come more naturally to his
   predecessor, "Chatshow Charlie". A hundred days into his leadership,
   Sir Menzies cut a wretched figure.

   Since late summer, however, things have slowly got better. Helped by
   the fact that nobody in his right mind could contemplate the purgatory
   of another leadership contest before the next election, the Lib Dems
   put on a decent show of unity at their party conference in September.
   They also managed to win some positive coverage for the "green-tax
   switch" that allowed them to drop a damaging commitment to raising the
   upper rate of income tax to 50% in favour of environment-friendly
   taxes. With parliament's return after the long recess, Sir Menzies no
   longer looked quite so out of his depth at PMQs.

   Over the past few months he has also been lucky. There is now rather
   less interest in his shortcomings than in those of Gordon Brown, while
   Tony Blair's long goodbye has been dominated by foreign policy--in
   particular, by the attempts on both sides of the Atlantic to find a
   way out of the Iraq morass. That has played to Sir Menzies's strengths
   and reminded voters that the Lib Dems were the only major party to
   oppose the war.

   In January, egged on by some of his colleagues, Sir Menzies took the
   risk of calling for British forces to quit Iraq by October. Although
   he earned some (deserved) criticism for advocating a timetable that
   owed more to electoral populism than to concern for Britain's
   responsibilities, it won headlines. When Mr Blair announced last week
   the first phase of a withdrawal of the army from Basra, Sir Menzies
   was able to claim, somewhat speciously, that even the government now
   accepted his argument that there was nothing left for British troops
   usefully to do in Iraq.

   Crucially for Sir Menzies, his party's performance in the opinion
   polls has been resilient enough to prevent any panic in the ranks.
   Given Mr Cameron's grab for traditional Lib Dem voters on the
   environment, civil liberties and localism, the party's poll rating,
   hovering around 20%, has been impressive. Senior Lib Dems claim to be
   delighted that Mr Cameron has worked so hard to put climate change on
   the agenda. They point to polling data that suggests voters still
   think the Lib Dems are easily the greenest of the mainstream parties.
   The more salient environmental issues become, they argue, the better
   the Lib Dems should do. And, vitally, the topic provides an
   alternative to Iraq, which may well be stale by the next election.

   More than anything, however, Lib Dem morale is being sustained by the
   real possibility that the next election will result in a hung
   parliament. This week Sir Menzies surprised colleagues by revealing
   that the party had begun work on its negotiating strategy in case the
   election went that way. Sir Menzies has asked Paul Burstow, his chief
   whip, to examine the conventions on coalition discussions, which were
   last used in February 1974.

   Unfortunately, no primer can tell Sir Menzies what he should do in
   what is likely to be a fluid situation. Even if Labour ends up with
   the largest number of seats it could still have a significantly lower
   share of the vote than the Tories, thanks to the quirks of the
   electoral system. Supporting it in exchange for a promise to introduce
   proportional representation, which benefits third parties, would look
   opportunistic. But throwing their weight to the Tories, while
   extracting little in return from Mr Cameron, would strike left-leaning
   Lib Dem activists as a betrayal of principle.

   Patiently does it

   That suggests the Lib Dems need one of two things to happen if they
   are to realise their goal of voting reform. Mr Brown might abandon his
   usual caution and announce--well before the election--his intention to
   bring in some form of PR as part of a wider package of constitutional
   modernisation.

   But if, as is more likely, Mr Brown stays true to form and does
   nothing, Sir Menzies will have to take a punt that a second, quickly
   held, election would also result in a hung parliament. That has never
   happened before, but it just might create the conditions for getting
   the kind of deal his party could accept. It would also change British
   politics for ever. Sir Menzies can't help looking old, but what he
   must not do is give the impression that he is in too much of a hurry.

