
   Medicine: A new device detects heartbeats and brain activity at a
   distance, doing away with uncomfortable electrodes

   AS ANYONE who has undergone an electrocardiograph (ECG) examination
   knows, it is an uncomfortable procedure that involves sticky
   electrodes which seem to want to rip out your body hair when they are
   removed. This is because the current the electrodes detect is weak,
   and a really good contact needs to be made between apparatus and skin.

   Robert Prance and his colleagues at the University of Sussex, in
   England, plan to do away with all that. They have developed a device
   that can act as an ECG--or its cranial equivalent, an
   electroencephalograph--without even touching the skin. It does so by
   measuring the signal without drawing current, using "high impedance"
   sensors.

   Impedance is related to resistance--which, as generations of
   schoolchildren have had drummed into them, is the ratio of voltage to
   current. If current and voltage are fluctuating, however, other
   factors come into play, as the current and voltage interact with each
   other. Impedance is a measure of electrical resistance that captures
   the effects of this feedback.

   The advantage of using high-impedance sensors is that the signal--an
   electric potential--can be measured at a distance. This is because the
   resistance is so great that a layer of air makes no appreciable
   difference. Indeed, Mr Prance's new device can pick up the trace of a
   heartbeat from a metre away. It can also sense electrical activity in
   the brain through the hair.

   The result is a probe that can easily be picked up by medics and held
   close to the patient. Wires attached to the back of the probe lead to
   a computer that translates the electrical signals into a picture of
   the heartbeat, brainwave or whatever. A test version developed by the
   team was the size of a watch and was worn on the wrist. The final
   version will be of similar size, but will not touch the skin.

   Mr Prance hopes that his invention will not merely be more comfortable
   than today's electrode-based detectors, but will also be able to do
   new things. His team is experimenting with the use of many sensors in
   combination to produce pictures of electrical activity in the heart.
   An electrical wave traverses the heart each time it beats,
   co-ordinating the contraction and relaxation of the chambers that pump
   blood around the body. By joining 25 sensors together, the researchers
   hope to demonstrate the technique's potential as a medical-imaging
   tool. It would be difficult to do this trick with conventional
   detectors.

   Nor is the high-impedance technique restricted to medical
   applications. It is already being adapted to look for faults in
   microelectronic circuits, and it might eventually be used to test
   mechanical components made of stainless steel or carbon fibre for
   structural integrity. It could thus be used to give machines, as well
   as people, a clean bill of health.

