


   The contest to run Europe's biggest city is taking shape


   LONDONERS eager to prove that their metropolis really is, in
   Disraeli's words, "a roost for every bird" usually cite ordinary life
   at ground level: the diversity of races and languages, the yuppies,
   artists and immigrants juxtaposed in the same east London postcodes.
   They can now point to their aspiring rulers, too.

   The third election for the mayor of London, an office created in 2000
   for a city that had lacked its own administration since 1986, comes in
   May. The principal candidates are as curious as the population they
   hope to govern: a left-wing iconoclast who often favours globalisation
   (the Labour incumbent, Ken Livingstone), a shock-headed Old Etonian
   eccentric (the Conservative Boris Johnson) and a libertarian gay
   ex-policeman (the Liberal Democrat Brian Paddick), who made his name
   with a tolerant line on cannabis when he commanded a south London
   borough.

   Many Londoners are indifferent as to who their mayor is (voting
   turnout was only 37% in 2004). Yet the office has come to matter. The
   mayor controls a budget of £10.6 billion ($20.9 billion)--up from £3.8
   billion in 2001-02, and divided mostly between transport and policing
   (see chart). He also has powers over cultural matters and economic
   development; in 2006 he acquired more clout over housing, planning,
   the environment, and learning and skills. The biggest directly elected
   office in the country is also a bully pulpit.

   It is true, says Tony Travers of the London School of Economics, that
   London's mayor is weaker than his counterparts in New York and Tokyo,
   and that much power, particularly over schools, remains with the
   city's 32 boroughs. But he is also relatively unconstrained by his
   municipal council. The London Assembly does little more than vote on
   the mayor's annual budget--a pygmy next to the mighty New York City
   Council.

   Mr Livingstone, who won office as an independent in 2000 and retained
   it for Labour in 2004, has done better than many expected. He
   introduced a congestion charge in the centre of town (piquing the
   interest of other cities) and a more efficient ticketing system for
   public transport, expanding the bus service. He has enjoyed good
   relations with city financiers while redistributing wealth through
   planning decisions: developers are allowed to build in return for
   including affordable housing and other goodies for the poor. He also
   helped secure the 2012 Olympics for London and cash from the central
   government for a new cross-city train service.

   The mayor has his critics, however. Some attack his policies. The
   council-tax precept which helps fund the Greater London Authority
   (GLA), along with central-government grants and public-transport
   ticket revenues, has risen. Congestion has not dropped hugely. The
   mayor's enthusiasm for development (he wants a big increase in
   housebuilding, and a new generation of skyscrapers) alarms many, and
   he is thought indifferent to the suburbs.

   Mr Livingstone's style also draws ire. He is truculent, calling the
   American ambassador to London a "chiselling little crook" for not
   making embassy officials pay the congestion charge. He compared a
   Jewish journalist to a concentration-camp guard, and shared a platform
   with Yusuf al-Qaradawi, a controversial Muslim cleric. Some resent his
   grandstanding (he signed a deal to get oil from Venezuela's Hugo
   Chávez last year) and the public money he spends promoting the GLA and
   its works. There are also allegations that his London Development
   Agency made grants to dubious businesses linked to Lee Jasper, a close
   adviser, a charge that Mr Livingstone dismisses as a smear.

   Yet he remains a formidable politician, and the Tories' choice of
   candidate to run against him is a risky one. Mr Johnson's journalistic
   career was stellar (he was editor of the Spectator, among other jobs)
   but punctuated by controversy. He became an MP, but concealing an
   affair led to his removal from the Tory front bench in 2004 by Michael
   Howard, the party's leader; David Cameron, Mr Howard's successor,
   restored him. His sense of fun knows few bounds (Mr Paddick calls him
   a "clown"), which critics say equips him ill to run a city with dire
   social problems.

   Some Tories fear privately that a heavy defeat would reflect badly on
   Mr Cameron, who backed his schoolfellow's candidacy; others think a
   shambolic performance as mayor might be even more damaging. The
   former, at least, were heartened by a YouGov poll on January 3rd that
   put support for Mr Livingstone, at 45%, only one percentage point
   ahead of that for Mr Johnson (Mr Paddick lagged some way behind). Mr
   Johnson's own polling suggests that Londoners are now less willing to
   distinguish the mayor from the unpopular national Labour government.
   Mr Johnson kept a low public profile until the new year but visited
   every borough and recruited new staff in the meantime.

   What would a win by either main candidate mean for London? Transport
   defined the previous two elections but is declining as a concern among
   Londoners. The manifesto that Mr Johnson launched on January 7th
   focuses on violent crime and the housing shortage; he will keep the
   congestion charge, but tinker with its enforcement. Mr Livingstone
   emphasises the environment, noting Mr Johnson's lack of greenery. He
   also wants to consolidate London's 32 boroughs into five but is
   unlikely to achieve this even if he wins.

   A contest between two strong and controversial personalities could,
   for the first time since the office of mayor was created, make for a
   gripping election. Whoever Londoners choose to rule their roost will
   be a curious bird indeed.

