
   As the internet becomes intertwined with the real world, the resulting
   "geoweb" has many uses

   "EARTH materialises, rotating majestically in front of his face. Hiro
   reaches out and grabs it. He twists it around so he's looking at
   Oregon. Tells it to get rid of the clouds, and it does, giving him a
   crystalline view of the mountains and the seashore."

   That vision from Neal Stephenson's "Snow Crash", a science-fiction
   novel published in 1992, aptly describes Google Earth, a computer
   program that lets users fly over a detailed photographic map of the
   world. Other information, such as roads, borders and the locations of
   coffee shops can be draped on to the view, which can be panned,
   rotated, tilted and zoomed with almost seamless continuity. First-time
   users often report an exhilarating revelatory pang as they realise
   what the software can do. As the globe spins and switches from one
   viewpoint to another, it can even induce vertigo.

   Google's virtual globe incorporates elevation data that describe
   surface features such as mountains and valleys. Other data is then
   overlaid on it, notably a patchwork of satellite imagery and aerial
   photography licensed from several public and private providers. The
   entire planet is covered, with around one-third of all land depicted
   in such detail that individual trees and cars, and the homes of 3
   billion people, can be seen. All this has long been imaginable but has
   become possible only recently, thanks to high-resolution commercial
   satellite imaging, broadband links and cheap, powerful computers.

   Keyhole, an American firm, released the first commercial "geobrowser"
   in 2001. Google bought Keyhole in 2004 and launched Google Earth in
   2005. Its basic, free version has since been downloaded over 250m
   times, says Michael Jones, one of Keyhole's founders and now Google
   Earth's chief technologist.

   In 2004 America's space agency, NASA, released another geobrowser,
   called World Wind. More than 20m copies are in use. But Google's main
   geobrowsing rival is Microsoft. Both Encarta, Microsoft's
   encyclopedia, and TerraServer, a database demonstration project, had
   geobrowser-like features in the 1990s. At the end of 2005 Microsoft
   bought GeoTango, which contributed to the development of Live Search
   Maps, a web-based geobrowser that uses data from Virtual Earth,
   Microsoft's digital model of the planet. (Google also provides a
   web-based geobrowser via Google Maps.)

    An overlay shows desroyed villages in Darfur; sunbakers on Sydney's
        Bondi Beach; the city of Berlin, with detailed 3-D buildings

   Vincent Tao, GeoTango's founder and now director of Virtual Earth for
   Microsoft, allows that Microsoft has spent at the "couple of hundreds
   of millions of dollars level" on Virtual Earth. Most of that has been
   spent on the acquisition of imagery, which now totals 14 petabytes on
   900 servers. (One petabyte is 1m gigabytes.) The company is also
   adding detail in the form of textured three-dimensional models of
   cities devised from aerial photographs; ten cities are added each
   month.

   For its part, Google is relying on "crowdsourcing"--enlisting its
   users to build and contribute images, 3-D models of buildings and
   other data to enrich its digital planet. So far 850,000 users have
   contributed millions of annotations and more than 1m images, vetting
   one another's contributions. Wikipedia, which uses a similar system,
   is itself available through Google Earth. Users can read Wikipedia
   articles placed on the globe using "geotags"--spatial co-ordinates
   encoded into each entry. Other sites including Flickr, the leading
   photo-sharing site, and Google's YouTube, also support geotags.

   These virtual globes are being put to an unexpected range of uses.
   Google Earth was used to co-ordinate relief efforts in New Orleans in
   the aftermath of Hurricane Katrina in 2005. Tax inspectors in Buenos
   Aires are using it to see whether people are correctly reporting the
   size of their properties. An Italian programmer who was using the
   software noticed odd markings on the ground near his home town which
   turned out to be a previously unknown Roman villa. Roofers, landscape
   gardeners and solar-panel installers use the virtual maps to scout for
   potential customers. Rebecca Moore, a member of the Google Earth team,
   used the software to galvanise her neighbourhood in the Santa Cruz
   mountains in opposition to a nearby logging project. And the Amazon
   Conservation Team, an American charity, equipped 26 indigenous tribes
   in the Amazon with hand-held global positioning system units and
   computers running Google Earth, to enable them to assert their legal
   sovereignty in the face of threats from loggers and miners.

   "It's turning into a map of historical significance," says John Hanke,
   head of Google's Earth and Maps division, and another of Keyhole's
   founders. "It is going to be a map of the world that is more detailed
   than any map that's ever been created." He may be understating the
   technology's importance.

   The world-wired web

   Geobrowsers are a stunningly effective means of visualising the
   planet. But they are just one part of a broader endeavour, the
   construction of a "geoweb" that is still in its infancy, much as the
   world wide web was in the mid-1990s. The web did away with many
   geographical constraints, enabling people with common interests to
   communicate, regardless of location. Yet placelessness jettisons some
   of the most useful features of information, which are now attracting
   new attention.

   At present the most feverish excitement surrounds the combination of
   virtual maps with other sources of data in "mash-ups". One of the
   earliest examples, housingmaps.com, created in 2005, combines San
   Francisco apartment listings from [3]Craigslist.org with Google Maps.
   Mash-ups have since become commonplace--Google says its maps are used
   in more than 4m of them. In April the company added features to Google
   Maps to make it easier to create mash-ups. Microsoft is at work on a
   similar tool. Another site, [4]platial.com, provides free mash-up
   tools for bloggers, spawning a new genre in self-absorption:
   autobiogeography.

   The geoweb has obvious appeal to those in the property business.
   [5]Zillow.com mashes Microsoft's Virtual Earth with other data to
   create maps of home prices in America. But property is just the start.
   At [6]gasbuddy.com, visitors can map local petrol prices to plan
   fill-ups. [7]ExploreOurPla.net brings together thousands of sources of
   images and data to let users investigate climate change.

   House prices overlaid on a satellite map at Zillow.com; San Francisco,
       seen on Google's Street View; a GIS view of an air-force base

   These examples illustrate the emerging architecture of the geoweb:
   data, such as information on traffic jams or seismic tremors, is
   hosted separately from the images and models of the geobrowser, which
   assembles, combines and displays the information in new ways.
   [8]GeoCommons.com hosts data, from crime rates to melanoma statistics,
   that can be combined to create colour-coded "heat maps" of intangibles
   such as "hipness". Visitors to [9]Heywhatsthat.com can generate a
   diagram of the view from any high spot to see the names of visible
   mountain peaks.

   Here the neogeographers, as mash-up enthusiasts are known, have
   crossed into the terrain of "geographic information systems" (GIS),
   the fancy software tools that are used by governments and companies to
   analyse spatial data. Geobrowsers are still quite primitive by
   comparison, but are much easier to use. For its part GIS deals with
   critical infrastructure, so its data tend to be of impeccable quality.
   Jack Dangermond, the founder of ESRI, a private firm that dominates
   the GIS market, says interest stimulated by the geoweb has helped to
   boost business by 20% this year. Ron Lake of Galdos Systems, a firm
   that specialises in integrating civic geodata, says geobrowsers have
   led to a push for better public access to such data.

   When the analytical insights and data quality of GIS are combined with
   the geoweb's visualisation and networking prowess, startling
   efficiencies emerge. Last year Waterstone, a consultancy, assembled
   the geodata for 13 American air-force bases and wrapped them up in a
   modified version of NASA's World Wind geobrowser. This makes it
   possible to walk through a 3-D model of each base and call up multiple
   layers of data. A project manager can view live video from a
   construction site and identify the contractors and their vehicles. A
   planner can assess a proposed building's effect on runway visibility.
   And an environmental engineer, while viewing a plume of contaminated
   groundwater, can delve into 45 years' worth of documents associated
   with the site. Carla Johnson, Waterstone's boss, says the project cost
   less than $1m and is expected to save the air force around $5m a year
   through faster decision-making.

   Smile, you're on Google Earth

   Like any technology, the geoweb has both good and bad uses. When
   geobrowsers first introduced easy access to satellite imagery,
   something that had previously only been available to intelligence
   agencies, many observers worried that terrorists might use such images
   to plan attacks. Google Earth seems to have been used in this way by
   Iraqi insurgents planning attacks on a British base in the city of
   Basra, for example, in which individual buildings and vehicles can be
   clearly seen. After this came to light in January, the images of the
   area in question were replaced with images from 2002, predating the
   construction of the camp.

   This summer a member of the Assembly of the State of New York called
   on Google to obscure imagery after the geobrowser was used by plotters
   in a foiled airport attack. Yet Mr Jones says Google has been formally
   contacted by governments in this regard only three times (including by
   India and by an unspecified European country), and that in each case
   the issue was resolved without making changes to the imagery in Google
   Earth.

   Although some buildings or areas are blurred for security reasons,
   Google says this is done by the firms from which it licenses the
   imagery. Microsoft says it blurs photos in response to "legitimate
   government and agency requests". But the images are typically between
   six months and three years old, which limits their tactical
   usefulness; and satellite and aerial images are available from many
   other sources, and have been for some time. So in some respects,
   geobrowsers have not made possible anything that was not possible
   before--they have just made access to such images much cheaper and
   easier.

   "It's a question of the policy and the thinking catching up with the
   technology," says Mr Hanke. "Ease of access alters the debate." Google
   insists that it takes security concerns very seriously, and points out
   that the American government's official position is that the benefits
   of making satellite images widely available outweigh the risks.
   Indeed, some jurisdictions are embracing the exposure. The Canary
   Islands have donated high-resolution imagery to Google in the hope
   that virtual visitors might become real tourists, and the city of
   Berlin has made its painstakingly detailed digital models available
   through Google Earth.

   For governments that are used to hiding things from each other's spy
   satellites, the advent of the geobrowsers does not change things very
   much. Ordinary members of the public can now call up images of Chinese
   nuclear submarines via Google Earth, but intelligence agencies around
   the world have had access to far more detailed satellite images for
   years. And the fact that the submarines can be seen at all means that
   China is not trying to keep their existence a secret. Even so, armed
   forces do find the geoweb useful. The American military is a big user
   of both World Wind and the enterprise version of Google Earth. And
   some governments do have grounds for concern: the government of Sudan,
   for example, would undoubtedly prefer the United States Holocaust
   Memorial Museum not to highlight destroyed villages in Darfur via an
   overlay in Google Earth.

   Close to home, the geoweb turns out to have implications for personal
   privacy as well as geopolitics. Google's new Street View feature,
   launched in May, lets users of Google Maps move through
   stitched-together street-level imagery of several American cities,
   giving private citizens a taste of "crowdsourced" surveillance. All
   the views are of public streets yet, in aggregate, they challenge
   accepted notions of privacy--especially for those caught doing
   something naughty as Google's specially equipped camera van swoops
   past. Shortly after the feature was launched, users uncovered a car
   getting a ticket from Miami police, a man scaling a locked gate in San
   Francisco and another man entering a shop selling sex toys.

   "When the coverage is everything and everywhere, there is going to be
   a big problem," says Lee Tien, a lawyer at the Electronic Frontier
   Foundation, an internet campaign group. Satellite images are not
   detailed enough to allow individual people or vehicles to be
   identified, but faces and licence plates can be seen in Google's
   Street View. There are few legal precedents. In 2003, Barbra Streisand
   sued to keep her Malibu estate out of an online library of images of
   the California coast. She lost. Although movie stars are more stalked
   than most--several sites provide geobrowser links to celebrities'
   homes--it is easy to imagine innocent annotations that could be
   unintentionally dangerous. Shelters for battered women, for example,
   often prefer not to make their locations widely known.

   Google's Mr Jones believes the benefits are strong enough to overcome
   these concerns. "I think there's a social barrier to everything new,"
   he says. The availability of useful information will outweigh concern
   over surveillance and loss of privacy, he believes. Five or six years
   ago, he notes, people worried about the spread of camera phones. But
   now "everyone just presumes that everybody has a camera on their
   phone--it's nothing special." The lesson of previous technologies, he
   says, is that "we all are happy to tolerate things that would have
   previously been considered intolerable."

   Indeed, all the features--good and bad--of the internet will
   eventually gain new dimensions on the geoweb. Bots and intelligent
   agents will crawl it. It will be populated by avatars, as Second Life
   becomes first life, and it will enable the inverse: telepresent
   machines roaming the real world. Ghostly, private worlds will be
   overlaid on reality, sensitive only to members. The malicious
   possibilities are sobering: location-based viruses, geohacking and,
   worst of all, geospam.

   Despite these concerns, the potential of the geoweb is not lost on
   investors. Since the beginning of last year more than 20 geospatial
   firms have been the targets of mergers and acquisitions, with Google,
   Microsoft and ESRI among the buyers. But it is not quite time to
   declare the dawn of Web 3.0. For one thing, consumer geobrowsing does
   not make any money. Microsoft's Mr Tao says that revenue has to come
   from advertising for now, until critical mass enables location-based
   transactions. Google, true to form, is investing first and worrying
   about revenue later.

   The road to Web 3.0

   A more immediate hurdle is on the verge of resolution. Google recently
   submitted KML, the tagging protocol that describes how objects are
   placed in Google Earth, to the Open Geospatial Consortium (OGC), a
   standards body. This will let other firms support it. GML, a protocol
   developed by the OGC to encode spatial-information models, was
   formally adopted as an international standard this year. Standards for
   dynamic geodata, the sharing of 3-D models of buildings and geodata
   from sensor networks ought to be in place by next year. All this will
   ensure interoperability and do for geodata what the web did for other
   forms of data, says Carl Reed, the OGC's chief technologist.

   At the same time, the incorporation of satellite-positioning
   technology into mobile phones and cars could open the floodgates. When
   it is available, simply moving about one's neighbourhood can then be
   tantamount to browsing and generating content without doing anything,
   as demonstrated by a company called Socialight. Its service lets
   mobile users attach notes to any location, to be read by others who
   come along later. Taken further, the result could end up being a sort
   of extrasensory information awareness, annotation and analysis
   capability in the real world. "When that happens", says Mr Jones,
   "then the map is actually a little portal on to life itself." The only
   thing that can hold it back, he believes, is the rate at which society
   can adapt.

