
   Rates stay on hold, but not for long


   BUSINESS lobbies cajoled, politicians hinted. It was to no avail. The
   response from the Bank of England this week was as stony as its façade
   in Threadneedle Street. The central bank resisted the pleas to cut
   interest rates for a second month running.

   As in December, when the bank lowered the base rate from 5.75% to
   5.5%, its monetary-policy committee (MPC) faced a quandary. On the one
   hand, the exhibits pointing to a sharp slowdown caused by the credit
   crunch are piling up ominously. On the other hand, the menace of a
   renewed bout of inflation is looming larger.

   There was a strong case for repeating the prescription of lower
   interest rates this month. Business volumes in the big
   financial-services sector have recently been dropping at the fastest
   pace since the depths of the recession of the early 1990s, according
   to a report this week from the CBI, an employers' organisation. This
   chimed with the Bank of England's own findings on the credit market,
   published on January 3rd. The survey showed steep declines in the
   availability of credit in the last three months of 2007 compared with
   the previous quarter. Lenders said that they were expecting further
   sharp falls in the first three months of 2008.

   Tighter credit is already constricting the housing market. In November
   only 83,000 mortgage loans to buy homes were approved, compared with
   an average monthly total of 110,000 over the previous five years. The
   annual rate of house-price inflation has halved since last autumn,
   falling from 10.7% in September to 5.2% in December, according to
   HBOS, a bank.

   With consumer confidence at a low ebb, shops are feeling the pinch.
   The British Retail Consortium reported the weakest sales in December
   for three years. Retailers' share prices have been wilting further on
   fears of a consumer slowdown this year (see chart). Marks & Spencer's
   price nosedived on January 9th after Britain's biggest clothing
   retailer reported tough trading conditions.

   As household spending sags, exports are unlikely to provide much
   offsetting support for economic growth because the international
   outlook has darkened again. Following very weak employment and
   manufacturing figures, some economists are now arguing that America
   may already have slipped into recession. The euro area is in better
   shape, but its economy is set to slow appreciably in 2008.

   The deterioration in Britain's outlook for growth might have pointed
   to a rate cut this month but the central bank also had to take into
   account worsening inflation prospects. Consumer-price inflation is
   only just above the government's 2.0% target, but the recent surge in
   world oil and gas prices will feed through to higher domestic
   inflation in the months ahead. Petrol prices have continued to rise
   and home-energy costs are now on the way up.

   Weakness in the pound, reflecting worries about a slowing British
   economy, is also likely to push up inflation. Sterling's
   trade-weighted value has slipped by 4% since the MPC met in December
   and is now 9% lower than in July 2007. Putting it all together,
   consumer-price inflation will rise to 2.4% in January and to 2.9% in
   September, according to new forecasts from Barclays Capital, an
   investment bank.

   The resurgence in inflationary pressures in early 2008 will coincide
   with the peak period for negotiating new pay deals. At such a
   sensitive time, the Bank of England needed to demonstrate its
   commitment to keeping inflation under control, in order to avoid a
   destabilising wage-price spiral. A sharp reduction since mid-December
   in the spread of interbank lending rates over the base rate gave the
   MPC room for manoeuvre. Provided the committee feels that inflationary
   expectations remain in check, it will cut rates again soon in order to
   fend off a severe downturn.

