
   What the funding scandal really tells us about Britain, its Jews and
   immigrants in general



   DAVID ABRAHAMS; Jon Mendelsohn; Lord Levy (also known as "Lord
   Cashpoint"). Notice anything funny about those names, and some of the
   others at the heart of the previous and present furores over political
   funding? Maybe--and ideally--you don't. But some people have spotted a
   theme. A front page in theDaily Telegraph featured a photograph of Mr
   Abrahams--who donated more than £660,000 ($1.4m) to the Labour Party
   using illegitimate intermediaries--shaking hands with the Israeli
   ambassador. The nudge-nudge headline was "Hunt for the `real donor'".
   An intrepid columnist in the Independent dared, as she put it, to
   incur "the wrath of Moses" by questioning the involvement of the
   "shape-shifter" Mr Abrahams and the others with a pro-Israel lobbying
   group.

   Britain's discomforted Jewish community has definitely noticed. "A
   second `Jewish scandal'" was the nervous headline in last week's
   Jewish Chronicle. But the interesting thing about the Jewish
   connection to these episodes is probably not the conspiracy imagined
   in a few fevered gentile minds. It is rather the insight they may
   offer into a different sort of anxiety, another kind of suspected
   conspiracy--one which may also exist more in imagination than in fact,
   but is important nonetheless.

   Macher or nebekh?

   Motive is often difficult to fathom. Acts that look virtuous crumble
   under scrutiny; charity comes to look like moral self-aggrandisement
   or self-interest. In the case of Mr Abrahams's donations, there have
   been unsubstantiated hints that he was hoping for a more tangible
   payback, such as a peerage or favouritism for his businesses. Even he
   may not know precisely why he gave so much and in the manner that he
   did.

   But a little digging in his native north-east suggests that the
   nudge-nudge view of him (it is worse online) is wide of the mark. Mr
   Abrahams was apparently known as "Podge" at school and, later, as
   "Daft David" in the town-hall circles that he tried unsuccessfully to
   penetrate. He was the only child of a respected father; when the
   father died, Mr Abrahams was reluctant to release the body for burial.
   Though not all of his dealings seem to have been completely straight,
   he is seen less as a Machiavel than as a fantasist: in Yiddish
   parlance, less a macher (a big-shot) than a nebekh (someone to be
   pitied). Still, odd though he may be, in his need to be seen, and see
   himself, in the company of the powerful, he seems to epitomise a
   common syndrome: common among Jewish men of his generation and older,
   and among immigrants to Britain in general.

   "It appears", remarks one observer of Anglo-Jewry, "that the ambition
   of the well-to-do and rising immigrant community soars after some kind
   of official dignity." That was written in 1900, in the middle of the
   great wave of immigration responsible for most of Britain's current
   Jewish population. Like Mr Abrahams, who gives money to universities
   but did not go to one himself, most Jews in Britain then had little
   chance to distinguish themselves through their careers or in high
   office. Instead, many sought--like Mr Abrahams's father, once Lord
   Mayor of Newcastle--to do so in local politics or societies. The same
   urge for recognition, for an outward show of arrival and belonging,
   still grips some Jews, and many other newcomers, today.

   Why? A century ago anti-Semitism was widespread: Britain's first
   immigration laws were introduced in 1905 to slow the influx of
   impoverished Jews (the folk memory of that poverty helps to explain
   many Jews' philanthropic streak). But the view of modern Britain as
   rampantly anti-Semitic, which sometimes features in American
   narratives of European decline, and in the scaremongering of some
   British-Jewish columnists, is wildly overblown. Anti-Semitism still
   exists: in the refectories of certain public schools, on the far
   right, among some Muslims, and in the tropes and Fagin allusions for
   which some journalists lazily reach. But it can also be found among
   Montana survivalists, in Connecticut country clubs and in the Nation
   of Islam.

   The truth is that Britain today is one of the best places to be
   Jewish, ever. Jews no longer need to camouflage themselves against
   prejudice; nor do they bump up against a "glass ceiling". Mr Abrahams,
   like Lord Levy during the dénouement of "cash-for-honours", is seen by
   some as a sort of Trollopean "Court Jew", thrown to the wolves when
   circumstances demanded. But the key fact is that there are, and have
   long been, Jews in the establishment's upper reaches ("more old
   Estonians than old Etonians", Macmillan jibed of Margaret Thatcher's
   cabinet).

   The real cause of the syndrome is subtler than that. It is a vague but
   powerful sense, which many immigrant antennae pick up, that there is
   somewhere an inner sanctum of Britishness, an elusive top table, to
   which, by reason of birth and class, the newcomer is not invited,
   ostensibly welcomed though he may be. Finding a way to it, through
   lavish acts of patriotism or patronage, becomes for some a mission
   more compelling than money. Three or four generations in, most Jews
   have outgrown those neuroses; but some haven't, and other, newer
   ethnic groups, such as some Anglo-Indians, have acquired them.

   The funding row rumbles on, as politicians confess fresh accounting
   indiscretions. More may emerge about Mr Abrahams's role. So far the
   main lessons are that the rules on donations need to be overhauled, as
   Gordon Brown now promises--and that, whatever they are, they should be
   obeyed. If the backgrounds of some of those involved suggest a further
   conclusion, it does not concern either anti-Semitism or nefarious
   lobbying. It has to do with the mixed feelings of marginality and
   ambition immigrants to Britain experience. Those feelings are visible
   in another, more revealing photo that has surfaced of a young Mr
   Abrahams: dressed to the nines, with his parents and his granny, for a
   garden party at Buckingham Palace.

