
   Gun crime is leaving the big cities for smaller towns


   BILLY COX, aged 15, in his parents' flat; Michael Dosunmu, aged 15, in
   his bedroom; James Smartt-Ford, aged 16, at the local ice-rink: the
   lethal shootings of three south-London teenagers in less than a
   fortnight have startled the public and sent politicians scrambling for
   new initiatives. Tony Blair announced on February 18th that gunmen as
   young as 17 could soon face the automatic five-year penalty for
   illegally owning a gun that is currently reserved for those over 21. A
   "gun summit" with police and local leaders was scheduled for February
   22nd. David Cameron, the Tory leader, said he wanted to make dads
   stick around as role models by giving marriage a tax break.

   Is gun crime getting better or worse? Both, depending on what you look
   at. The government can boast of a recent dip in firearm offences (down
   6% in England and Wales in the 12 months to April 2006), but only if
   it includes toy airguns; remove those and the number goes up a
   fraction. And although firearm homicides hit a seven-year low last
   year, injuries more than quadrupled in the same period.

   The clearest and steadiest trend in all this is where gun crime is
   taking place: as the chart shows, guns seem to be moving out of the
   biggest cities and into their surrounding towns. Historically,
   firearms have been strongly concentrated in just three of 43 police
   districts in England and Wales: London, Greater Manchester and the
   West Midlands (which includes Birmingham). In the year to April 2002,
   less than a third of gun offences took place anywhere else. Last year
   almost half did.

   Gun crime is piling up on big cities' doorsteps. Last year London's
   Metropolitan Police dealt with 10% fewer gun crimes per head than
   three years earlier, but four of their five neighbouring forces saw
   increases. In Essex, where gun offences almost doubled in that period,
   police attribute it to an upsurge in armed robberies of vans carrying
   cash in transit. Criminal gangs have been driven out of the capital by
   the Met, they say: "When you get on top of a problem like this you
   don't suppress it, you disperse it."

   Keith Bristow, head of firearms crime at the Association of Chief
   Police Officers, believes drug-dealers are being similarly displaced.
   In an interview with the Times on February 19th he said that crack
   cocaine-dealers, along with their guns, were being forced out of
   cities by tougher policing and vicious competition.

   Yet the overall reduction in gun crime in big cities hides a more
   stubborn problem. The teenagers shot dead in London this month were
   not bank robbers; one killing seems to have been rooted in a
   text-messaging row. In some dark corners, firearms are morphing from
   the tools of the criminal trade into the accessories of teenaged
   gangs, to whom crime (usually low-level drug-running) may be secondary
   to the desire for companionship and security.

   While the Met has driven out organised gun crime, it has found such
   "disrespect" killings tougher to deal with. The Flying Squad, which
   fights "professional" crime in the capital, reported in 2004 that half
   its cases involved firearms. By last year this had fallen to
   one-fifth. In contrast Trident and Trafalgar, the police units that
   deal with shootings such as this month's crop (exclusively among
   blacks, in Trident's case), have not seen their caseload diminish in
   the past four years.

   Most worryingly, those who suffer from gun crimes are getting younger.
   In 2003 16% of the victims in Trident cases were less than 20 years
   old. Last year the proportion was twice as high.

