
   Clean technology: Architects believe that biologically inspired
   designs can help to reduce the environmental impact of buildings

        Ideas worth stealing: Grimshaw's proposed indoor rainforest

   ARCHITECTS have long taken inspiration from nature. In ancient Egypt
   columns were modelled on palm trees and lotus plants, and building
   designers have borrowed the shapes and proportions of natural forms
   ever since as they strived to achieve aesthetic perfection.

   Some architects now believe that such biomimicry has more to offer
   than simply making buildings look good. They are copying functional
   systems found in nature to provide cooling, generate energy and even
   to desalinate water. And they insist that doing these things using
   biomimetic designs is not just a gimmick, but makes financial sense.
   "It's often the case that green technology is considered to be
   commercially unattractive," says Michael Pawlyn, an architect at
   Grimshaw, the firm behind the Eden Project, a highly acclaimed biome
   structure in England. That perception, he says, is wrong--and he has
   the designs to prove it.

   So far, the use of biomimetic features in buildings has been driven as
   much by aesthetics as by function, and has been limited to relatively
   simple, passive systems. The Arab World Institute in Paris, for
   example, has an array of mechanical, eye-like irises on its
   south-facing façade. These open and close to control the amount of
   light entering the building, thereby regulating the internal
   temperature.

   Similarly there are now several buildings that have ventilation
   systems based on those found in termite mounds. The Eastgate Centre, a
   shopping centre and office block in Harare, Zimbabwe, has a mechanical
   cooling system made up of vents and flues that help hot air out of the
   structure. "It's the same principle as the chimney effect, but a bit
   more controlled," says Professor George Jeronimidis, director of the
   Centre for Biomimetics at the University of Reading. As hot air rises
   and flows out through vents at the top of the building, cooler air is
   drawn in at ground level.

   Dr Jeronimidis is now taking this concept further by using adaptive
   materials that flex in response to the level of moisture in the
   air--an idea borrowed from the way pine-cones open and close. Using a
   cellulose-like fibre composite, he has created a vent that changes
   from one curved shape to another, depending on the relative levels of
   moisture inside and outside a building. When warm, moist air builds up
   inside the building, the vent opens to allow it to escape. But when
   the air inside is dry, the vent stays shut and moist air from outdoors
   is kept out. "In principle it can be made to respond naturally,
   without any additional power," says Dr Jeronimidis.

   Intelligent designs

   Architects have become more interested in this sort of thing in recent
   years, he says, as greater attention is paid to the energy consumption
   and sustainability of buildings. Biology offers solutions to a range
   of problems. "Nature has had the benefit of a pretty long R&D period,"
   says Mr Pawlyn, who hopes to take the exploitation of natural designs
   to a completely new level. His firm has borrowed a trick used by
   fog-basking beetles and in the nostrils of camels for a novel
   desalination plant.

   When Grimshaw was given the brief to regenerate the Santa Catalina
   Isthmus, a narrow stretch of land on the coast of Las Palmas in Grand
   Canaria, the firm came up with the concept of a 3km (1.9 mile)
   promenade with a theatre and botanic garden as its focus. But rather
   than creating yet another drain on local resources the architects
   wanted the structure to be cooled and irrigated by natural means. "We
   decided to put forward a scheme that showed how the island could move
   towards self-sufficiency in water and energy, without relying on
   fossil fuels," says Mr Pawlyn.

     Ideas worth stealing: a rendering of the proposed Las Palmas Water
                  Theatre (left); the Eden Project (right)

   This meant finding a way to turn seawater into clean drinking water
   without expending too much energy. Fog-basking beetles, which are
   found in Namibia, have an ingeniously simple way of doing this. They
   hide underground during the day so that when they come out at night,
   their dark backs are relatively cool compared with the ambient night
   air. As moisture-laden breezes roll in from the Atlantic, the water in
   the air condenses on the beetles' backs (just as a cold bottle of beer
   left on a table causes water in the air to condense on its surface).
   The beetles simply have to tilt their bodies to make the water trickle
   into their mouths. A similar trick is also used by camels to prevent
   them losing moisture as they exhale. Moisture secreted through the
   nostrils evaporates as the camel breathes in, cooling the nostrils in
   the process. When the camel breathes out, moisture within the air then
   condenses on the nostrils.

   Inspired by this, Mr Pawlyn and his colleagues have designed their
   theatre around the same principles. A series of tall, vertical
   evaporation "gills" are positioned so that they face towards the sea
   and the incoming coastal breeze. Warm seawater, taken from close to
   the surface, is pumped so that it trickles down these units. As the
   breeze blows through the gills some of the seawater evaporates,
   leaving salt behind. The clean, moist air then continues its journey
   until it encounters a series of vertical condensing pipes. These are
   kept cold by pumping deep-sea water, from 1,000 metres below the
   surface, through them. As the moist, warm air hits the pipes the water
   condenses and trickles down to be collected.

   "You get a very powerful desalination effect," says Mr Pawlyn. This
   system is able to supply enough water for the 70,000-square-metre
   complex. A traditional flash-distillation desalination plant consumes
   between five and 12 kilowatt hours (kWh) of energy per cubic metre of
   water. The biomimetic approach, however, requires just 1.6 kWh per
   cubic metre. And since the water pumps will be mostly powered by a
   wind turbine, driven by the same prevailing winds that provide the
   plant's airflow, the overall energy consumption of the site is reduced
   even further. In the process, the same system can also help to cool
   neighbouring buildings, says Mr Pawlyn.

   Build me a rainforest

   Although it is unclear whether this innovative project will go ahead,
   the principles have already been tested by Charlie Paton, an engineer
   who collaborated in the scheme. His organisation, Seawater Greenhouse,
   has built pilot greenhouses that show this idea really works. The
   catch is that it will only work in certain climates, says Mr Pawlyn.
   "If you have a very dry and hot environment, the water readily
   evaporates."

   Nonetheless, Mr Pawlyn and his colleagues believe that biomimetic
   principles can be taken even further, to generate new income as well
   as reduce running costs and resource use. Natural ecosystems are
   restorative, notes Mr Pawlyn. "They operate in a closed loop made up
   of quite complex webs of different organisms," he says. "Man-made
   structures tend not to do that." Instead, man-made systems tend to be
   linear, consuming raw materials at one end and producing waste at the
   other. The result is a gradual depletion of natural resources.

   In an effort to reproduce a closed-loop system, Grimshaw has developed
   a design for an indoor tropical rainforest. This botanical garden is
   designed to sit on an existing landfill site and be a completely
   carbon-neutral structure. For most of the year, heat to maintain the
   hothouse will be provided by solar heating through a glazed roof.
   During the colder months additional heating will come from landfill
   biomass. The building is designed to be flanked by a number of large
   vertical vessels into which biodegradable waste, originally intended
   for the landfill, will be tossed. As the waste breaks down in these
   large composting units, it reaches temperatures of up to 75°C, and
   this heats the indoor garden.

   This building will not only be carbon-neutral but will also generate
   income, by providing the service of waste disposal. Some countries
   impose landfill taxes of as much as £20 ($40) per tonne of waste. The
   designers reckon that their proposed building could generate as much
   as £7m ($14m) a year by acting as a substitute for a landfill site.
   And in the true spirit of restorative closed-loops, the resulting
   compost can be sold for agricultural use.

   "Buildings should be able to pay for themselves," says Professor
   Julian Vincent, director of the Centre for Biomimetics at the
   University of Bath in England. At the moment, he says, most
   biologically inspired systems used in architecture are simply
   morphological. "This seems to me to lose the point of biomimetics," he
   says. There is huge potential, but architects are only just beginning
   to learn how to apply biomimetics in a more functional way, says
   Michael Weinstock, director of the Architectural Association School of
   Architecture in London. Not only large projects but smaller homes and
   offices can benefit from the same principles, he insists. "One of our
   ambitions is to ensure that every building ought to be able to
   generate its own energy," he says.

   Bringing biomimetics home

   This need not require elaborate new structures like Grimshaw's theatre
   or indoor rainforest. Biomimetics can be applied in simpler ways, too.
   Smart paints which use a self-cleaning principle borrowed from lotus
   leaves are now being tested. Once applied, the surface of the paint
   takes the form of densely packed ridges or bumps, just like the
   microscopic bumps found on lotus leaves. A property of such tiny bumps
   is that they prevent drops of water from spreading out: the drops
   simply roll off the surface instead, taking dirt with them.
   (Self-cleaning glass relies on a similar principle.) And organic solar
   cells, which mimic photosynthetic processes to capture light and
   convert it into electricity, are arguably a form of biomimetic
   technology, too.

   "Part of the challenge, I believe, is to reconnect people with
   resources," says Mr Pawlyn. He makes a strong case that borrowing
   architectural ideas from nature can help to reduce the environmental
   impact of buildings. In the process, it may also encourage people to
   view natural systems with greater respect, in more ways than one.

