
   Women's share of the prison population is creeping up


   CRIME is mostly men's work, and prison a man's world. But in Britain's
   heaving jails, the fastest-growing group is women. Male inmates have
   almost doubled in the past 30 years and females have nearly
   quadrupled. In 1970 one in 40 prisoners was a woman. Today it is one
   in 18.

   Before the steep rise came a long fall (see chart). Bar a couple of
   spikes during wartime (when male potential offenders were away
   fighting), women's share of jail places shrank steadily. That is
   partly because they were being locked up elsewhere. New reformatories
   for alcoholics and asylums for the feeble-minded catered mainly for
   women, "seeking to cure them, or where this proved impossible, to
   restrain them for so long as they were able to bear children,"
   according to Lucia Zedner of Oxford University. Psychiatrists began
   diagnosing women as mad, not bad, and female inmates became guinea
   pigs for new treatments outside the penal system.

   How different are today's inmates? "Women are imprisoned for much the
   same reasons as they were in the time of Elizabeth Fry," a
   19th-century prison reformer still pictured on £5 notes, says Juliet
   Lyon of the Prison Reform Trust, a campaigning organisation. Theft is
   still the most common offence, accounting for a third of the women put
   away. Addiction is still rife: 30% are inside for drugs offences, and
   58% are daily users. Debt and poverty continue to inspire crime.

   So do mental problems: eight out of ten female prisoners suffer from
   them, and they are twice as likely as men to be treated on arrival.
   But just as changes in mental-health policy helped to drive down the
   number of female prisoners at the start of the 20th century, they may
   now be driving them up. Places in mental hospitals have fallen from
   150,000 in 1950 to 30,000 now, as more patients are treated in the
   community. A side-effect is that those who go off the rails may go to
   jail instead of hospital.

   Female offenders, who tend to have committed only minor offences, have
   been hit again by a crackdown on nuisance crime. In 1992 those
   convicted of theft had a 2% chance of being sentenced to custody in
   the lower courts. By 2000 the odds were 14%. Tough regimes tend to go
   hand in hand with higher proportions of female inmates: in America,
   which imposes long sentences for mild crimes, women make up 9.1% of
   prisoners; in Germany, which has one-eighth as many prisoners per
   person, they make up 5.3%. France's jails, with fewer prisoners still,
   are only 3.6% female.

   A country's treatment of women therefore reflects its approach to
   offenders generally. But women raise extra concerns. Two-thirds of
   British women prisoners have children under 18, and 95% of them have
   to move house while their mother is banged up. And there are subtler
   cruelties: women are visited less than men, since their jails are
   fewer and farther between and their partners less conscientious. A
   third try to kill themselves each year.

   Their misery has swayed a sceptical public. Three-quarters believe
   that mothers should be spared jail unless they are violent, according
   to SmartJustice, a charity. Last year an official review suggested
   replacing women's jails with small, local units. The government
   endorsed much of the plan in December and is due to report back with
   firmer plans by April. The slow pace is maddening, says Ms Lyon, but
   the direction is right, if funding materialises.

   That still leaves the remaining 94% of prisoners--men--whose swelling
   ranks the government plans to hold in huge new "titan" jails. Many,
   like most women, are petty criminals spending just weeks inside and
   learning little. A century ago women were the guinea pigs for new
   thinking in penal reform. Could it happen again?

