
   A boost for renewables, but nuclear power takes centre stage


   "I THINK there'd be plenty of support round here for a new nuclear
   plant," says Colonel George Smythe, chairman of a nuclear-power
   discussion group at Dungeness in Kent. Two giant atomic power plants
   dominate the flat shingle shoreline of this blustery bit of the
   Channel coast. Although the older Dungeness A was shut down for
   decommissioning in 2006, the plants provide hundreds of jobs in an
   area without many other big employers. When Mr Smythe asked residents
   what should replace the closed power station, the most popular answer
   was a new one (although a nature reserve came a close second).

   Such enthusiasm will be welcomed by Gordon Brown. On January 10th his
   government unveiled its much-delayed new energy policy, the
   centrepiece of which was a decision to support the building of new
   nuclear-power stations.

   Energy policy in Britain is under pressure from the imminent closure
   of many coal- and nuclear-fired power stations, increasing dependence
   on foreign suppliers (as North Sea oil and gas reserves dwindle) and
   worries about climate change. For Mr Brown, nuclear power ticks all
   the right boxes. It produces little carbon dioxide, the technology is
   well-developed and the uranium fuel can be obtained from stable,
   friendly countries such as Canada or Australia. Although ministers
   refuse to say how many new plants they want, most observers reckon
   that they hope existing stations will at least be replaced. Nuclear
   power now provides about 20% of Britain's electricity, and all but one
   of the ten remaining stations will be shut by 2023.

   The pro-nuclear decision was both widely trailed and controversial.
   Ministers planned to publish the bill last year, but when an
   environmental pressure group won a court case arguing that the
   government's consultation on nuclear power had been misleading, the
   bill was shelved and the consultation re-run. Polls show a modest rise
   in public support for nuclear power in recent years, but there is
   still anxious uncertainty over where to bury the waste.

   Economics may prove even trickier than politics. Formally, there is no
   need for the government to give its blessing to new nuclear stations:
   there is no law banning companies from building them now. But nuclear
   power has a troubled history in Britain. Thanks to planning delays,
   Sizewell B, Britain's newest nuclear plant, took 12 years to build.
   The finances of nuclear stations--with their huge upfront capital
   costs--make such delays very costly, and leave plants vulnerable to
   fluctuations in power prices. In 2003 low prices meant that British
   Energy, which operates Britain's more modern reactors, had to be
   rescued with £3 billion of public money.

   Ministers are keen to avoid further bailouts, and want new nuclear
   plants to be privately financed. State help will be limited to
   reforming the lengthy licensing process, streamlining the planning
   system and levying a charge on nuclear operators to pay for
   decommissioning and waste storage. But despite encouraging noises from
   power firms such as EDF, a French company, and E.ON, a German one, not
   everyone is convinced the sums add up. Some note that assurances about
   fully private funding have been replaced by statements that nuclear
   operators will pay their "full share" of costs--hardly the same.

   Not all the news was nuclear. The bill also sets rules for building
   more natural-gas storage (as imports replace dwindling domestic
   supplies) and for developing technology to capture and sequester
   carbon emissions from fossil-fuel plants. Britain has much potential:
   natural salt caverns and depleted gas fields could store decades of
   emissions from Europe.

   There was some good news for renewable fans, too, with the reform of
   the government's main subsidy for electricity from renewable sources.
   The existing scheme awards the same payments to all technologies. As a
   result, virtually all the money has flowed into onshore wind power,
   which, as the cheapest renewable technology, offers the biggest
   profits. But onshore wind has run into political difficulties of its
   own. Windy spots tend to be beauty spots, and complaints from
   residents have made it difficult to build turbines. That is one reason
   why renewables account for just 3% of British electricity-generating
   capacity, compared with 28% in Germany and 16% in Spain. Under the new
   plan, developing more expensive technologies (such as offshore wind or
   tidal power) will attract more money.

   Some greens argue that building new nuclear stations means scaling
   back the government's renewable-energy goals. Documents leaked last
   year suggested that Mr Brown wanted to water down Britain's commitment
   to a European target that 20% of all energy used must come from
   renewables by 2020. But others are keen to extend an olive branch to
   the nuclear industry. Gordon Edge, an economist at the British Wind
   Energy Association, dismisses talk of crowding out. "Building nuclear
   power plants doesn't have to mean less money for renewables," he says.
   "After all, we have a common enemy."

