
   Teachers want more; everyone else wants what they are having


   AFTER a decade of generous pay rises, teachers found the three-year
   pay deal proposed on January 15th by Ed Balls, the schools secretary,
   distinctly underwhelming. On offer is 2.45% extra in 2008-09 and 2.3%
   in each of the following two years. This is far short of the 4%
   teaching unions had said they needed to keep pace with retail-price
   inflation--"in effect a pay cut", growled Steve Sinnott, who leads the
   National Union of Teachers. His executive will be meeting to discuss
   the offer next week and he expects a "robust response".

   The teaching unions' response may be robust; their actions are likely
   to be less so. The deal was better than teachers feared it might be.
   Gordon Brown had called for pay restraint; a "difficult year" for the
   public purse, said the chancellor, Alistair Darling. He urged
   public-sector pay deals of 2%, the government's target for
   consumer-price inflation, its preferred measure.

   And teachers are doing well: their median pay has risen by almost a
   fifth in real terms over the past decade; most can retire on a full,
   final-salary pension at 60; and holidays are longer than in almost any
   other job. Another fact the unions do not tend to point out when
   making comparisons with the private sector, or sweeping statements
   about pay cuts, is that in any given year half of all teachers get
   much more than the headline deal. This is because they move up the
   teachers' pay scale, which boosts their pay packet by another £1,000
   or so. And then there are the sweeteners that have proliferated in
   recent years: retention allowances; golden hellos in shortage
   subjects; performance-related bonuses; extra payments for pastoral
   duties or for working in the big smoke.

   Although teachers may (just about) have been bought off, their pay
   offer could backfire on the government by causing anger in other parts
   of the public sector, where disputes over last year's pay settlements
   are turning into running battles. The bodies reviewing pay for police,
   prison officers and nurses all recommended rises of 2.5% in 2007.
   Unaffordable, said Mr Brown, and phased in the awards, with a mere
   1.5% added to salaries for the first six months and an additional 1%
   afterwards, bringing their value down to 1.9% overall.

   Nurses grumbled, and secured some concessions--only in England was the
   award not eventually paid in full--but concern about patients' welfare
   meant that their hands were tied. Prison officers were less quiescent.
   They pulled out of a voluntary no-strike agreement in protest, and at
   some prisons held wildcat strikes--the first in their association's
   68-year history. The justice secretary, Jack Straw, has threatened to
   make it illegal for prison officers to strike unless the agreement is
   reinstated.

   Angriest of all are the police. Historically, the ban on police
   strikes has been rewarded by the government's willingness to honour
   the recommendations of the body that reviews their pay. The Police
   Federation plans a protest rally in Westminster on January 23rd and a
   ballot of members on whether they want the right to strike. "I have no
   doubt the teachers' ability to take strike action influenced the
   government's decision to pay in full the recommendation of their
   pay-review body," says Jan Berry, the chairman of the federation. More
   than 200 MPs, mostly Labour backbenchers, have signed a House of
   Commons motion calling for the government to give police officers the
   2.5% increase in full.

   On January 16th the government published the recommendations of yet
   another pay review--this time the one that looks at MPs' salaries. The
   country's elected representatives are worth 2.56% more than last year,
   it said. Mr Brown demurs. He wants his right honourable friends to set
   an example to all public servants and settle for a more modest 1.9%,
   paid in two stages. But he cannot force them to do so: MPs have a free
   vote on their own pay (although not for much longer, as the government
   has asked a senior civil servant to recommend a less inflammatory
   alternative).

   That vote is due to be held on January 24th. Its result--far more than
   a fraction of a percentage point for teachers or police officers--will
   set the tone for pay negotiations right across the public sector.

