
   Energy: Researchers have developed an environmentally friendly light
   bulb that uses very little energy and should never need changing

                                                             Belle Mellor
                                                             Belle Mellor

   ALTHOUGH it symbolises a bright idea, the traditional incandescent
   light bulb is a dud. It wastes huge amounts of electricity, radiating
   95% of the energy it consumes as heat rather than light. Its life is
   also relatively short, culminating in a dull pop as its filament
   fractures. Now a team of researchers has devised a light bulb that is
   not only much more energy-efficient--it is also expected to last
   longer than the devices into which it is inserted. Moreover, the lamp
   could be used for rear-projection televisions as well as general
   illumination.

   The trick to a longer life, for light bulbs at least, is to ensure
   that the lamp has no electrodes. Although electrodes are undeniably
   convenient for plugging bulbs directly into the lighting system, they
   are also the main reason why lamps fail. The electrodes wear out. They
   can react chemically with the gas inside the light bulb, making it
   grow dimmer. They are also difficult to seal into the structure of the
   bulb, making the rupture of these seals another potential source of
   failure.

   Scientists working for Ceravision, a company based in Milton Keynes,
   in Britain, have designed a new form of lamp that eliminates the need
   for electrodes. Their device uses microwaves to transform electricity
   into light. It consists of a relatively small lump of aluminium oxide
   into which a hole has been bored. When the aluminium oxide is
   bombarded with microwaves generated from the same sort of device that
   powers a microwave oven, a concentrated electric field is created
   inside the void.

   If a cylindrical capsule containing a suitable gas is inserted into
   the hole, the atoms of the gas become ionised. As electrons accelerate
   in the electric field, they gain energy that they pass on to the atoms
   and molecules of the gas as they collide with them, creating a glowing
   plasma. The resulting light is bright, and the process is
   energy-efficient. Indeed, whereas traditional light bulbs emit just 5%
   of their energy as light, and fluorescent tubes about 15%, the
   Ceravision lamp has an efficiency greater than 50%.

   Because the lamp has no filament, the scientists who developed it
   think it will last for thousands of hours of use--in other words, for
   decades. Moreover, the light it generates comes from what is almost a
   single point, which means that the bulbs can be used in projectors and
   televisions. Because of this, the light is much more directional and
   the lamp could thus prove more efficient than bulbs that scatter light
   in all directions. Its long life would make the new light ideal for
   buildings in which the architecture makes changing light bulbs
   complicated and expensive. The lamps' small size makes them comparable
   to light-emitting diodes but the new lamp generates much brighter
   light than those semiconductor devices do. A single microwave
   generator can be used to power several lamps.

   Another environmental advantage of the new design is that it does not
   need mercury, a highly toxic metal found in most of the bulbs used
   today, including energy-saving fluorescent bulbs, fluorescent tubes
   and the high-pressure bulbs used in projectors. And Ceravision also
   reckons it should be cheap to make. With lighting accounting for some
   20% of electricity use worldwide, switching to a more efficient system
   could both save energy and reduce emissions of climate-changing
   greenhouse gases.

