
   Two pre-modern ailments are making a comeback

   AS BEFITS an industrialised country, Britain's public-health problems
   are those of wealth rather than poverty. But beneath headlines about
   fat, cigarettes and a national epidemic of drunkenness, two diseases
   that were believed vanquished decades ago are re-emerging. Both are
   linked to immigration.

   On December 28th the Department of Health (DoH) confirmed what doctors
   have long suspected: rickets seems to be on the rise. The
   disease--thought to have been eradicated in the 1950s--stunts growth
   and deforms the skeleton, characteristically causing bowed legs and
   worse.

   The other disease is tuberculosis, dimly remembered as an affliction
   of slum-dwellers and glamorous Victorian poets. Antibiotics and a
   national screening programme had all but wiped out "consumption" by
   the middle of the last century. Yet cases have been increasing since
   the mid-1980s. In 2000 6,323 were reported in Britain (excluding
   Scotland), or 11.7 for each 100,000 people; by 2006 that had risen to
   8,113, or 14.6 per 100,000, and the true number is thought to be
   higher.

   Migration is involved in the resurgence of both conditions, though in
   different ways. Rickets is usually caused by a lack of vitamin D,
   which is needed to absorb calcium to build bones. Most vitamin D is
   made when skin is exposed to sunlight. Not much sunshine is
   needed--around 15 minutes a day in summer--but obtaining it in
   Britain, with its grey climate, house-bound children and official
   warnings about skin cancer, can be tricky. North of around 52 degrees
   latitude (roughly, beyond Milton Keynes), the winter sun is too weak
   for vitamin D to be produced. Skin colour matters too: dark-skinned
   people require more sun. What scant data there are suggest that up to
   1 in 100 children from ethnic minorities may suffer from rickets.

   Whereas migrants from sunny countries may develop rickets after
   arriving in Britain, tuberculosis is a disease that often comes with
   them. Rates of infection are lowest among natives and highest among
   immigrants from Africa (see chart), where the disease is common in
   part because of the spread of AIDS, whose sufferers are particularly
   susceptible to infection. Tuberculosis is most common in the poorer
   areas of Britain's cities, which tend to have high immigrant
   populations and where poverty and deprivation erode resistance to the
   disease. Newham, a poor east London borough that is home to many
   immigrant families, has around 100 infections per 100,000 people, the
   highest rate in the country and comparable to China's figure.

   In theory, rickets is easy to cure: official advice is to get more
   sunshine and, for pregnant women and young children, to take vitamin D
   supplements (though only around a fifth of mothers heed it).
   Tuberculosis is harder to stamp out. Vaccinations, which used to be
   universal, have been reintroduced for children in high-risk areas.
   Immigrants from countries with the disease are offered screening when
   they arrive, although Chris Griffiths, a tuberculosis expert at Queen
   Mary, University of London, reckons the system is too leaky to catch
   all of them. Often those most at risk are hardest to reach. One
   drug-resistant strain has been circulating in Camden and Islington for
   five years, especially among homeless people and ex-prisoners. This
   has prompted suggestions that sufferers be detained in secure
   hospitals--a Victorian response to a Victorian disease.

