
   Things are looking up for Britain's largest refugee community


   GLOOM had descended on the Lodge Lane Somali Women's Group. The
   landlord was selling up and the small Liverpool charity did not have
   enough money to buy him out. Eviction was two weeks away. Then in
   walked Mariam Gulaid, the group's treasurer, with a bulging carrier
   bag. Inside was £14,100 in cash, raised in a whirlwind door-to-door
   collection from local Somalis--"all women," she adds proudly. They are
   now on the way to buying the building.

   Little is known of Britain's Somalis. Even counting them is hard: the
   2001 census came up with a total of 43,691, but surveys since then
   suggest a number nearer 100,000. A century-old trickle of economic
   migrants became a flood of refugees in the 1980s, increasing in the
   late 1990s as tens of thousands fled violence. Somalis are now
   Britain's largest refugee group.

   News tends to focus on the criminal exploits of their young men, who
   have acquired a fearsome reputation in some quarters. Reporters might
   learn more from the women: they are finding their feet, and helping
   friends and family find theirs.

   "The men always say that women change when they come to England," says
   Mrs Gulaid, who estimates that at least half the women who come
   through her door are single parents, either through death or,
   increasingly, divorce. For women, life in Britain means support from
   the state and, through this, independence from their husbands, she
   says.

   Somali men seem to have a bumpier transition. Three-quarters have been
   to secondary school and one in ten has a degree, but language
   difficulties and unrecognised qualifications make unemployment the
   norm. Jill Rutter, a migration researcher at the Institute for Public
   Policy Research, a think-tank, estimates that 65-70% are out of work.
   All-night sessions chewing qat also play their part (see [4]article).

   Down the road from Lodge Lane is the Merseyside Somali Community
   Association, a men's club. The brightly painted building is more a
   social venue than the action-oriented women's centre, which means that
   some men sneak into the women's group for advice. Osman Mohamed, its
   chairman, says hysteria about terrorism and suspicion directed at
   groups of black youths have given Somali men a reputation they do not
   deserve.

   It is hard to sort fact from fiction, as crime figures are broken down
   only by broad racial categories. Somalis have made the news for a few
   ruthless crimes, including the murder of Sharon Beshenivsky, a rookie
   police officer, in 2005. But police say these villains are
   unrepresentative. Paul Hurst, a police constable who has patrolled
   Toxteth's Somali neighbourhood for 21 years (and visited Somalia on a
   police bursary), reckons a hard core of about 30 Somali youths are
   active in car crime and low-level drug-dealing in the city.
   Nonetheless, crime in Somali "Tocky", as Toxteth is known, is lower
   than in neighbouring Picton and Wavertree, and light-touch policing
   has kept the peace. A repeat of the bloody Toxteth riots of 1981, when
   local Afro-Caribbeans clashed with police, is unthinkable, everyone
   agrees.

   The outlook for young Somalis is brightening. Lack of English among
   newly arrived refugees has prevented progress at school: a 1999 study
   of students in Camden, north London, found that just 3% got five good
   GCSE qualifications, compared with 48% of all students (and 21% of
   refugee children). But as the number of asylum seekers has plummeted,
   achievement has soared: in 2005 24% of Somalis in Camden got their
   five good passes.

   The fall in new arrivals has also damped down clan tensions, often
   blamed for causing fractures in the community. The Information Centre
   about Asylum and Refugees, a research body, counts at least 100 Somali
   organisations in London. Now, Liverpool's various bodies have overcome
   their differences to form an umbrella group, which is badgering the
   council for a joint community centre.

   Image remains crucial, especially to elders who fear their community
   is unfairly smeared by impostors. Economic migrants from all over east
   Africa (some of them ethnic Somalis) claim to be from Somalia to boost
   their chances of gaining asylum: a favourite pastime of British
   Somalis is spotting the fakes. Hussain Osman, on trial for trying to
   blow up a London station in July 2005, is considered one of Britain's
   highest-profile Somalia-born refugees. He may be nothing of the sort.
   Italian police say he is Hamdi Issac, and Ethiopian.

