
   The Bank of England stands firm, but cuts are on the way


   LIKE some poltergeist, the financial crisis keeps on thumping
   confidence just as it seems about to return. This week there was much
   alarm when Mervyn King, governor of the Bank of England, said it would
   take several more months before banks revealed all the losses they
   have incurred and took the necessary action to deal with them. His
   warning followed significant declines in the price of British bank
   shares. On top of all that, the world oil price has continued to soar,
   pushing the average price of petrol up to £1 ($2.10) a litre.

   Yet on November 8th the central bank's monetary-policy committee once
   again decided to keep the base rate at 5.75%--the level it has been at
   since July. The main reason for the decision was the continuing
   resilience of the British economy. The latest figures for GDP show no
   sign of the recent financial turmoil. National output grew in the year
   to the third quarter by 3.3%, the fastest increase for three years and
   well above the underlying growth rate of around 2.5-2.75%.

   The recent upswing has been boosted by a sharp recovery in business
   investment but it also owes much to the fact that consumers are still
   in fine fettle. Retail-sales growth has picked up, reaching 5.2% in
   the third quarter compared with the same period in 2006. One reason is
   that the housing market, although showing some signs of weakness, has
   remained sprightlier than expected. Though house prices fell by 0.5%
   in October, according to HBOS, a bank, they rose by 1.1%, on figures
   from the Nationwide Building Society.

   While GDP growth has remained buoyant, the rate-setters have been
   reluctant to ease policy. After all, it wasn't that long ago that Mr
   King had to write a public letter explaining an inflationary
   overshoot. Inflation has since subsided to a level below the
   government's target, but the bank worries that it may rebound as an
   economy with little spare capacity runs at full tilt. And although
   sterling has strengthened markedly against the dollar, reaching $2.10
   on November 7th, its overall trade-weighted value has slipped by
   around 2% in the past three months, which will add to inflationary
   pressure.

   Yet most in the City think the bank will cut rates before long. In a
   sign that the economy is now starting to slow, manufacturing output
   fell by 0.6% from August to September. More worrying still was a
   downbeat report from the services sector, which dwarfs manufacturing
   as a share of the economy. The purchasing managers' survey reported a
   pronounced slowdown in activity in October, bringing it down to its
   lowest level since May 2003.

   These declines are consistent with the first impact of the feared
   credit crunch, as banks raise their lending rates and become more
   reluctant to make loans. And since the financial malaise is not
   confined to Britain, the economy will be hurt by slowing exports.
   Prospects for growth in America and the euro area are being scaled
   back.

   Britain's economy will also take a hit as the City suffers from the
   slowdown in international financial activity. Business investment too
   is likely to slacken in the months to come, partly because the overall
   economic outlook has darkened and partly as a consequence of tighter
   credit.

   The main worry, however, is that consumers will finally pull in their
   horns. The recent strength of household spending (see chart) is a
   minor miracle given that disposable income has been creeping ahead at
   its slowest rate since 1982. A drop in saving made this possible, but
   consumers are now likely to respond to tighter credit and slowing
   house prices by rebuilding their finances and curbing their spending.

   So although Britain's central bank has yet to follow America's in
   cutting interest rates in response to the credit crunch, this seems
   only a matter of timing. The bank will set out new projections for
   growth on November 14th, when it publishes its quarterly Inflation
   Report. It will almost certainly signal that monetary easing is on the
   way to counter what otherwise might be too sharp an economic slowdown.

