
   How prisoners pay scandalously high rates 

   TOP of the list of complaints of many of Britain's prisoners is not
   the snoring of their cellmates, nor the quality of the food, but the
   difficulty and expense of making telephone calls. Mobiles are
   forbidden (though many inmates possess them), and most prisoners have
   only two hours a day in which they may use the payphones. These are
   limited in number and often broken, and the queues tend to be long.
   The charges are high, too. The minimum rate for a call to any United
   Kingdom land-line number is 10p, which buys 55 seconds of chat, after
   which it is 1p for every 5.5 seconds. To call a mobile costs 19-65p
   per minute. These rates are less egregious than those charged by other
   providers to many hospital patients, who are similarly unable to shop
   around. But they are higher than in public call boxes and for
   prisoners, whose average wage is £8 a week, they are mountainous.

   Then inmates had better stay silent, is one response: those who commit
   crimes must expect to forfeit access to the conveniences of modern
   life. The counter-argument is, in the words of Charles Clarke, a
   recent home secretary, that an offender "is much less likely to
   reoffend if he feels part of a family and community, from which he
   receives support as well as owes obligations". As it is, 45% of
   prisoners lose contact with their families during their sentence.

   In some ways, visits would be better than calls. But such is the
   overcrowded state of British prisons that last year male inmates were,
   on average, held 50 miles (80km) from home and women 58 miles. For the
   10,700 or so prisoners imprisoned more than 100 miles from home,
   visits were even more difficult.

   Prison telephones in England, Wales and Northern Ireland are run by
   BT, which won the contract from the Prison Service in 1998. BT has
   unusual costs in that the prison phone system is small and must allow
   the monitoring of calls. It points out that it won the tender against
   competition, and that anyway the Prison Service sets the rates.

   Critics, however, say the charges could, and should, be renegotiated.
   Telecoms rates have generally fallen in the past ten years but in
   prisons are fixed until the contract ends in 2011. And prisoners have
   no choice but to use BT.

   Protests have so far been to no avail. With the backing of the prisons
   ombudsman, a prisoner has been trying to get the Prison Service to
   lower its charges, saying his rights to respect for family life,
   codified under Article 8 of the European Convention on Human Rights,
   have been infringed. But in November a High Court judge ruled against
   him.

   Bad news for prisoners, certainly, and especially for the many
   illiterates among them (82% have the writing ability expected of an
   11-year-old) and for the 14% who are foreigners (calls abroad are even
   more expensive than domestic ones). But the innocent, too, are
   victims. As a report from several prison charities this week points
   out, 160,000 children each year have a parent who is sent to jail.
   That is more than the number of children whose parents get divorced.
   Nearly a third of these children suffer from mental-health problems.

   It's good to talk, as BT used to say. Too bad if you, or your dad,
   can't afford to.

