
   Nuclear power draws nearer as renewables retreat

   THE timing was impeccable. As the first hints of winter sent
   temperatures falling this week, British Energy, whose eight nuclear
   power stations can meet a fifth of Britain's electricity demand, said
   on October 22nd that it had discovered a technical problem in one of
   its reactors. Worried that three similar reactors might be similarly
   afflicted, it decided to shut two of them down and to delay restarting
   the other, which was offline for maintenance.

   British Energy shares dived 8% that day and short-term power prices
   jumped by about 15%. Unplanned outages have been commoner of late.
   Another of the firm's reactors is also offline due to an "electrical
   fault". Last year cracked boiler pipes forced a long shutdown at two
   other sites.

   For the nuclear lobby, such technical difficulties highlight the
   urgency of immediately replacing Britain's doddery old reactors, many
   of which date from the 1960s and 1970s. Environmentalists, most of
   whom oppose nuclear power, see things differently. They argue that
   British Energy's troubles are evidence that nuclear power is an
   unreliable technology that has no place in a modern energy mix.

   Unfortunately for greens, ministers seem to agree with the
   atom-splitters. Impressed by arguments that nuclear energy is a proven
   source of low-carbon power, and worried about the dependence on
   foreign fossil fuels caused by the decline of North Sea oil and gas,
   the government has been preparing the ground for a nuclear revival. An
   ostentatious public consultation on the issue finished this month, and
   some official pronouncement is expected in the next few months.
   Meanwhile EDF Energy, a French company, has pledged to build a plant
   by 2017, with three more to follow.

   Environmentalists fret that new nuclear plants will come at the
   expense of eco-friendly technologies such as wind and wave power. On
   October 23rd those fears seemed to be confirmed. The Guardian
   newspaper published extracts from a leaked document suggesting that
   Gordon Brown was trying to wriggle out of a pledge made by Tony Blair,
   his predecessor as prime minister, that 20% of European energy
   consumption would be met from renewable sources by 2020. Civil
   servants described the target as "expensive" and said that it faced
   "severe practical difficulties". That was a diplomatic way to speak of
   a target that Britain, which gets 2% of its energy from renewables
   now, has little chance of meeting. Malcolm Wicks, the energy minister,
   points out that the target is for Europe as a whole, and suggests
   Britain might manage 10-15% by the deadline.

   Stung by accusations that it is diluting its trumpeted commitment to
   greenery, the government details its support of all sorts of expensive
   schemes. A multi-million-pound competition to build a "clean" coal
   power plant that would trap and store carbon emissions in depleted oil
   fields is to be launched in November. Subsidies for renewable energy
   will be rejigged in the hope of encouraging technologies, such as
   solar or wave power, that are not yet competitive. But that cuts
   little ice with experts, most of whom agree that the government is
   unwilling to spend the money required to give renewables a big boost.
   "It is wedded to nuclear power," says Robin Webster of Friends of the
   Earth, a green group.

   Yet even if ministers row back on renewables, they may not get the new
   nuclear plants they want. Decades of decline have left the industry
   short of engineers. Economics is a problem too. The government insists
   that any nuclear stations must be built without state aid. But nuclear
   plants--with their huge capital costs and glacial start-up times--are
   a dicey proposition in Britain's liberalised electricity market, where
   prices fluctuate rapidly. Ministers are trying to make planning rules
   more nuclear-friendly, and hope that tighter carbon-emission limits
   will help nuclear energy shine by comparison with fossil-fuel plants.
   But Martin Brough of Oxera, an economics consultancy, thinks that more
   will be needed, most probably a guaranteed minimum carbon price. That
   would be tantamount to stifling the markets, and reneging on another
   energy promise.

