
   The link between British and American politics is less obvious than it
   looks



   THE British attitude to America tends to oscillate between snootiness
   and awed self-deprecation. In the past few weeks, the political class
   has opted for a collective swoon. Like threadbare housewives dreaming
   of American nylons after the war, MPs and others have gazed covetously
   at the televised primaries, with their drama, diverse candidates and
   balloons. "There is an unpredictability, optimism and openness,"
   laments one columnist, "that many on this side of the Atlantic will
   envy." In short: we laughed, we cried, it was better than "The West
   Wing".

   The self-flagellation has often been accompanied by another humbling
   idea: that the outcome of the presidential election will influence,
   even somehow determine, the course of British politics too. "If you
   want to predict Britain's political future," advises another
   commentator, "just look at America." This starstruck fatalism is
   mistaken. American politics does not supply an automatic pattern or
   prophecy for Britain--and it never has.

   Never have been slaves

   The argument that it now does relies in part on an analogy between the
   two main Democratic contenders, on one hand, and Gordon Brown and
   David Cameron, the Tory leader, on the other. There is something to
   it: like Hillary Clinton, the prime minister is a kind of political
   dynast, having inherited his premiership from his long-term political
   partner; his pitch, like hers, rests on his avowed experience. The
   other, slightly less convincing part of the analogy sees Mr Cameron,
   with his relative youth, relatively gifted oratory and intermittent
   hope-mongering, as a sort of Etonian Obama. Mr Cameron encouraged the
   comparison before New Hampshire; since then he has been enthusiastic
   about John McCain and Mrs Clinton too.

   The parallel is superficially plausible because post-war American and
   British politics have indeed tended to mirror each other. Bill Clinton
   and Tony Blair; Reagan and Margaret Thatcher; before them, Eisenhower
   and Macmillan, and JFK and Wilson: the two countries' political cycles
   have often overlapped, and like-minded leaders (albeit less schmaltzy
   in Britain) have coincided. There is a longstanding transatlantic
   trade in tactics and policy ideas, and in consultants, pollsters and
   other political mountebanks. Mr Brown and his fellow New Labourites
   are known to have studied Mr Clinton's victorious 1992 campaign; but
   the phenomenon goes back at least to the influence of Nixon's 1968
   advertising on the Tories. (It is not exclusively west-to-east:
   witness the Tory-influenced Republican attacks on Mr Clinton in 1992,
   and, maybe, the speech his wife made on a John Major-esque soapbox in
   New Hampshire.)

   But the relationship is not--as some comment implies--a causal one. Mr
   Clinton's rise did not cause Mr Blair's; Mrs Thatcher's election did
   not determine Reagan's. Rather, both sets of leaders emerged from
   political circumstances (the cold war and its end, economic
   turbulence) that were themselves similar. Quite apart from the
   doubtful idea that in Britain posh is the new black, the main reason
   the latest analogies don't work is that, socially and politically,
   Britain and America have diverged.

   To simplify, Britain has not had George Bush. The issues dominating
   the primaries--how to get out of Iraq; how to revive the country's
   reputation; how to govern less divisively--don't resonate in the same
   way in Britain. The underlying social rifts--between religious and
   secular voters, and over the culture wars that began in the 1960s--do
   not apply. The '60s happened in Britain too, but most people were
   inside having a cup of tea.

   So, perhaps temporarily, British and American politics have decoupled.
   Insofar as there is a superficial resemblance, it may be because
   American parties face imperatives of a kind that British ones have
   already confronted. As the enthusiasm of some Conservatives (the
   "Obamacons") for Mr Obama suggests, the old correspondence between the
   Tories and the Republicans has broken down--but it seems likely that
   the Republican Party, as a number of its members are already urging,
   will have to embrace environmentalism and cuddly economics as the
   Tories were forced to. Look closely at the Democrats, meanwhile, and
   they seem to be promising more or less what Labour has been offering:
   capitalism with a more human face, better health care and so on. A
   facetious observer might describe Mr Brown as the Scottish Obama--or
   Mr Obama as "the Black Gordon".

   As for the idea that Britain could use more of that American drama: it
   is true that more town-hall meetings and debates among leaders, and
   open "primaries" in constituencies, would enliven elections. But the
   reality is that Britain's parliamentary system, in which voters face
   narrower choices, can never replicate the thrills and surprises of
   presidential campaigns.

   However, another complaint made by the starstruck--that British
   politicians are boringly homogeneous--is unfair. Britain's history,
   like its political system, is different from America's: in particular,
   race is not the schismatic issue in Britain that slavery and
   segregation make it in America. But class plays something like the
   same historical role--and from a class perspective, Britain's recent
   leaders have been impressively eclectic. Mr Major's father was a
   circus artist; Lady Thatcher (who, to remind, is also a woman) was the
   daughter of a shopkeeper. Mr Cameron is the poshest leader the Tories
   have dared to pick for more than 40 years, so far has anti-toff
   prejudice (see Etonian references above) replaced the old upper-crust
   hegemony. Meanwhile another minority--Mr Brown's Scots--is now as
   over-represented in government as the toffs once were.

   So, Bagehot submits, Britain has had its quiet equivalents of the
   Mormon, Evangelist, war hero, woman and black candidates who are
   currently on tour in America. But then, as American visitors may have
   noticed, occasional jingoistic spasms such as this one are as
   characteristic of the British as self-deprecation.

