
   Migration has once again become a touchy political issue

   UNTIL recently, politicians who inveighed against immigration could
   expect support from an angry minority of voters in many Western
   countries. Some, like Australia's Pauline Hanson, won moments in the
   limelight and then faded away. Others got closer to political power:
   in France in 2002 the anti-immigrant Jean-Marie Le Pen reached the
   run-off stage of the presidential election; Denmark's centre-right
   government has been kept in office with support from an anti-migrant
   party; and in Austria in 2000 Jörg Haider's far-right party joined a
   coalition government. On each occasion this was controversial, but
   could be explained as a quirk of the electoral system, not a
   reflection of widespread anti-migrant sentiment.

                                                                  Reuters
                                                                  Reuters

                                                          Woolly thinking

   Today, however, hostility to immigration is becoming mainstream.
   Britain's prime minister, Gordon Brown, whose Labour government has
   allowed remarkably high rates of immigration for years, recently
   called for "British jobs for British workers", a meaningless slogan
   previously used by the far-right National Front. The opposition
   Conservatives' leader, David Cameron, says he wants to see
   "substantially lower" immigration. Both government and opposition say
   they will keep out workers from Bulgaria and Romania, along with those
   from any other new EU members, for as long as possible.

   In France Nicolas Sarkozy campaigned for the presidency in 2007
   sounding as hostile to foreigners as Mr Le Pen, and swept to office.
   He is now proposing immigration policies that have liberals quivering
   with anger. Most controversially, a new law passed in November will
   allow DNA testing of immigrants' relatives who apply to come to France
   under a family reunification programme.

   Italian politicians whipped up violence against migrants after the
   death of a woman in Rome last October, allegedly at the hands of a
   Romanian Roma (gypsy). Officials ordered the expulsion of Romanians
   with criminal records and set about bulldozing migrants' camps. Local
   thugs took that as a cue to beat up foreigners in the streets.

   In countries where proportional representation gives a say to small
   parties, support for anti-immigrant populists has gradually risen. The
   second-largest grouping in Norway's parliament is the misnamed
   Progress Party, which wants to discourage the entry of
   "far-foreigners" (migrants from beyond the Nordic region, especially
   dark-skinned ones). The right-of-centre People's Party in Switzerland,
   which had campaigned with a crude poster showing white sheep booting
   out a black one, got 29% of the vote in elections last October.

   Across the Atlantic, mainstream candidates for the 2008 presidential
   elections are lining up to talk tough about border controls and
   cracking down on illegal migrants. The dramatic collapse of an
   immigration-reform bill in the Senate in June, despite the support of
   President George Bush and the leaders of both the Democrats and
   Republicans in both houses of Congress, signalled that many ordinary
   voters are troubled by high rates of immigration. A coalition of radio
   hosts and internet activists arranged for opponents of reform to send
   1.5m faxes to senators and congressmen in June.

   Roy Beck, who heads NumbersUSA, one of the internet activist groups,
   says that membership of his organisation has grown from just 3,000
   active members in 2001 to more than 490,000 today. He also claims an
   e-mail list of 1.6m sympathisers from across the political spectrum.
   Some of the anxiety may be explained by worries about economics,
   language, crime and a general fear of the outside world raised by
   terrorism. More important, he suggests, is anger about the presence in
   the country of perhaps 12m illegal immigrants. He wants to see the
   number reduced by things like deportation, stronger fences and fines
   for employers who use illegal labour.

   The camel's nose

   Opponents condemned the Senate reform bill as an amnesty: "It teaches
   aliens that all they have to do is get in and wait. It is letting the
   camel's nose into the tent, the rest follows," says Mr Beck. But the
   bill would not have been a soft option. It envisaged higher spending
   on border defences and an obstacle course on the way to legal
   residence. Applicants for legal status would have had to pay $5,000
   and return home to await a decision. Yet the bill damaged the
   presidential chances of John McCain, a Republican senator who supports
   reform.

   Immigration is likely to prove a divisive factor in some states in the
   2008 presidential election. Republican strategists think voters are
   especially troubled by migration where there have been big new
   inflows, for example in the south-east (see map). Democrats are
   divided. Some are anxious not to alienate their traditional and
   growing support among Latinos and new migrant voters who might help to
   swing states such as New Mexico, Utah, Nevada and Arizona. But others
   want to get tough in places like Virginia, a formerly solid Republican
   stronghold that might be up for grabs, where rapid immigration has
   provoked anger. For Mr Beck this is an opportunity to push Democrats
   to take a harder line on immigrants, just as they have done in other
   policy areas: "To win competitive elections, Democrats now often
   oppose gun control," he says. "I want immigration to be an issue like
   guns."

   Perhaps the surprise is not that American voters are now reacting to
   high immigration, but that it has taken them so long. The last time
   the share of foreigners in America's population was anything like as
   high as now, in 1913 (when it was 15%, including illegals), the public
   demanded, and eventually got, tough limits on migration that slowed
   the inflow for decades. Nearly a century on, a similar dramatic
   clampdown seems unlikely, but hostility could slow the flow of legal
   migration, and greater efforts will be made to crack down on
   undocumented migrants.

   Yet public hostility to migration should not be overstated. In Spain
   and Greece, for example, natives seem relatively at ease with a big
   influx, at least as long as their economies are doing well. For some
   analysts the backlash against immigration is part of a wider response
   from hard-up activists who feel that elites do not properly represent
   their interests. But many people in host countries also see the gains
   from migration--and indeed some of them try it out for themselves.
   Some 5.5m British nationals, for example, currently live abroad, many
   in Spain, Australia and Greece. That amounts to nearly a tenth of the
   population back home, putting Britain on a par with Mexico as an
   exporter of people.

