


   Gordon Brown has identified the quality he most needs to project. Can
   he do it?

   [3]Gordon Brown

   PATRICK STEWART, once of Star Trek, was a petrifying Macbeth, and Sir
   Ian McKellen a monumental King Lear. Ewan McGregor is a slimy Iago.
   There has been a lot of top-notch Shakespeare on the London stage
   recently--and quite a lot of him in political commentary.
   "Shakespearean"--usually combined with "tragedy"--is one of the
   adjectives sometimes applied to Gordon Brown's premiership, the office
   for which he waited so long, but which so quickly came to seem
   ill-starred. There is some competition from Cassius in "Julius Caesar"
   (who "thinks too much" and "seldom smiles"); but the flawed
   Shakespearean hero whom Mr Brown has most seemed to resemble is
   Hamlet, with his "craven scruple/ Of thinking too precisely on
   th'event". Chiefly but not only because of last autumn's non-election
   fiasco, Mr Brown has begun to appear perilously indecisive--and he
   knows it.

   It is plain that he knows it because countering that perception is Mr
   Brown's priority for 2008. Just as he tried, and for a while last
   summer managed, to quash the idea that he is uncollegial and tribal,
   the prime minister is striving now to project decisiveness at every
   turn and in every sentence. In one of the interviews he gave as part
   of his new-year fight-back, Mr Brown vowed to make "big
   decisions...the right decisions...difficult long-term
   decisions...long-term and difficult decisions...long-term
   decisions...big long-term decisions"--you get the picture. He dropped
   in "fiscal arithmetic" a few times for variety, but the headline
   message is clear: this is to be the "decisive year".

   His calculation is that the old-fashioned virtues of strength and
   judgment are still more important than beer-buddy likeability. In
   Britain at least (and maybe not only in Britain), that calculation may
   be correct. With his occasional Timon of Athens-esque grumps, Mr Brown
   is thrashed by David Cameron, the Tory leader, when pollsters ask
   voters about the two men's charisma. But their overall ratings are
   close, which suggests other factors weigh as heavily. And Mr Brown's
   bid to cast Mr Cameron as a flip-flopping flibbertigibbet--part flashy
   Mark Antony, part toffy Andrew Aguecheek--may ring true enough to
   hurt. Mid-way through an electoral term, an opposition leader can
   afford some creative ambiguity; even so, Mr Cameron's stance on some
   issues, such as the new European treaty or real-world solutions to the
   Northern Rock crisis, is vulnerably flimsy.

   So Mr Brown could be right that decisiveness is the quality he most
   needs to project. Unfortunately, claiming to be decisive and actually
   being so are not the same. Moreover, in politics some decisions count
   for much more than others.

   Feel the future in the instant

   To get anything done, leaders need to make decisions. But certain
   decisions have a telling demonstration effect beyond their actual
   content. Decisiveness on big issues, or in the teeth of opposition,
   makes a leader seem resolute, far-sighted and above the narrow world
   of party politics, as Margaret Thatcher showed; so, to a lesser
   extent, did Tony Blair. The most effective decisions are often taken
   after deep but private consultation--with no-men as well as
   time-servers--so they manage to look bold while still being carefully
   considered.

   On the other hand, wilfully unpopular decisions can make a leader
   appear deranged, like some of those taken by Lady Thatcher in her
   late, Coriolanus phase ("Alone I did it!"). Then there are
   prevaricating pseudo-decisions, like Mr Brown's establishment of
   umpteen policy reviews. These at first looked clever and circumspect,
   but have cumulatively come to seem, as Hamlet puts it, "one part
   wisdom" and "three parts coward". Decisions forced on leaders by
   events--like Mr Brown's hasty emulation of the Tories' ideas for
   cutting inheritance tax--make them look weak or confused.

   Is Mr Brown starting to make more impressive calls? The long-term,
   difficult (and so on) decisions that he is touting mostly involve the
   economy, and specifically the tough line the government has taken with
   some public-sector unions over pay. On January 8th the chancellor
   offered, or threatened, to conclude three-year pay deals with some of
   them. By dwelling on this stringency, Mr Brown hopes to guard against
   both inflation and the political fallout of an economic downturn;
   also, less sensibly (because it makes him look desperate), to contrast
   his own record with the inflationary but long-ago early 1990s.

   Unfortunately, public-sector pay restraint may be a little too arcane,
   and bust-ups with unions too familiar, to work as reputation-forming
   decisions. But the announcement on January 9th that the government is
   to encourage the building of nuclear-power stations is more electric:
   overdue, perhaps, but important and controversial (as well as right).
   To persuade voters that Mr Brown really is The Decider, he ought to
   follow that up with, for example, decisions to put Northern Rock out
   of its misery, to scrap ID cards (which almost no one would mourn) and
   to do something genuinely radical with the National Health Service.
   Maybe Stephen Carter, his new right-hand man at Number 10, will help:
   Mr Carter is reputedly the man to provide the grip and focus that Mr
   Brown lost when he gave his erstwhile top aides their own cabinet
   jobs.

   In a recent documentary, Mr Blair said something interesting about
   decision-making. To do the prime minister's job properly, he
   reflected, "you need to be able to separate yourself somewhat from the
   magnitude of the consequences of the decisions you are taking." That
   ability to dissociate may not be an entirely appealing trait, but it
   is probably a necessary one for leaders, and is a very necessary one
   for Mr Brown. He has made a start, but in his "decisive year" he needs
   to seem much less Hamletic and more like his fellow Scot, Macbeth--for
   whom "the very firstlings of my heart [were]/ The firstlings of my
   hand."

