
   Worries over biofuels could work to Britain's advantage

   SIR RICHARD BRANSON, the bearded billionaire who founded Virgin
   Atlantic, is fond of surprises. Next month his airline plans to
   test-fly an aircraft that is partly powered by biofuels, something
   most experts thought was years away. From April Sir Richard's
   countrymen will begin filling their cars with a blend of petrol and
   biofuel, as part of the government's plan to ensure that 5% of
   Britain's transport runs on fuel made from plants by 2010.

   Transport accounts for around 20% of Britain's planet-warming carbon
   emissions. In theory biofuels produce low net emissions of carbon
   dioxide, since burning them merely recycles atmospheric carbon
   absorbed by the plant as it was growing. Others like them for
   different reasons. Farmers hope that growing crops to put in petrol
   tanks will be more profitable than growing them to put on dinner
   tables, and the prospect of domestic production appeals to politicians
   who are worried about energy security.

   Yet even as their star has risen at Westminster, biofuels have been
   raising doubts among greens. Friends of the Earth and Greenpeace, two
   environmental-lobbying groups, have given warning that biofuels may
   not be as eco-friendly as they seem. On January 14th a more august
   body took a similar line. The Royal Society, Britain's national
   science academy, published a report that analysed the bewildering
   range of biofuels on the market. It concluded that, thanks to carbon
   emissions from fertilisers and processing, some biofuels may cause
   more climate change than petrol. That raises the risk of a spectacular
   official own-goal: if targets encourage people to use the wrong sort
   of fuel, transport may get dirtier, not cleaner. The Royal Society
   wants ministers to specify targets not for biofuel consumption but for
   greenhouse-gas reduction. The government says it may do that after
   2010.

   Hopes that biofuels could boost farmers' income and improve energy
   security seem even more ephemeral. Dank, cloudy and small, Britain is
   ill-suited to mass production of the fast-growing crops favoured by
   the biofuel industry. For crops to provide even 5% of the fuel used in
   transport would require using huge swathes of arable land (see chart).
   "As far as actually growing things is concerned, I don't think it'll
   ever be big in Britain," says Lord Oxburgh, the head of D1 Oils, a
   biofuels firm.

   Even if Britain can't farm its way to green transport, some
   businessmen hope to turn a profit on biofuels by drawing on more
   reliable British skills. The Royal Society argues for a strict
   worldwide certification system, similar to that used for eco-friendly
   wood, to let consumers know just how green a particular biofuel is.
   Developing such a system would require exhaustive analysis of every
   step of a firm's supply chain. That's just the sort of thing that the
   City's legions of auditors and accountants would be good at--if they
   can get countries such as America and Brazil, both fiercely protective
   of their indigenous biofuels industries, to agree.

