
   The third party gets down to choosing its third leader in two years 

   THE race for the leadership of the Liberal Democrats, which began when
   Sir Menzies Campbell resigned in October, has not been gripping.
   Indeed, the impressive performance of Vincent Cable, their caretaker,
   has garnered as much attention, with polls suggesting that the party
   has gained more than the Tories from Labour's continuing travails.

                                                                       PA
                                                                       PA

                                      Huhne and Clegg: rivals and friends

   But the Lib Dems will prefer the uneventful showdown between Nick
   Clegg, their home-affairs spokesman, and Chris Huhne, who holds the
   environment brief, to the intrigue and scandal that marred their
   previous election in 2006. On November 21st ballot papers were sent
   out to the party's 64,000 members, who have until December 15th to
   vote. The result is expected two days later.

   Though Lib Dems downplay the ideological divide in their party, it
   remains a coalition of classical liberals (led by the MPs who penned
   the free-market Orange Book in 2004) and social democrats (more
   numerous among the base). Their name--a compound of the old Liberal
   Party and the short-lived Social Democratic Party--reflects this. And
   if Mr Clegg, an Orange Booker, belongs squarely in the former camp, Mr
   Huhne has slanted his pitch towards the latter. Their favourite
   historical figures are revealing: Mr Huhne admires Lloyd George, the
   chancellor he calls "the father of the British welfare state", while
   Mr Clegg prefers those who have stood against state power, such as
   Vaclav Havel, the Czech dissident, and Harry Willcock, a Liberal
   activist who campaigned against identity cards in the 1950s.

   Mr Huhne is a credible candidate. He forged successful careers outside
   politics, first as a journalist (including a spell at The Economist)
   and then in finance. His grasp of economics (he made his millions
   selling economic research in the City) is valuable to a party that has
   tripped up on the detail of spending pledges before. And he is a
   strong and knowledgeable champion of green taxes, a subject in which
   voters are taking an increasing interest.

   Yet he has failed to leave Mr Clegg in his dust: the two are
   level-pegging, with almost half of Lib Dem members undecided. Though
   Mr Huhne has the more technical mind, Mr Clegg's experience in home
   affairs gives him an advantage on the sorts of non-economic issues
   that are becoming increasingly prominent. His proposal of a managed
   amnesty for illegal immigrants is both radical and reasonable. He is a
   constructive critic of the government's record on civil liberties
   without losing sight of the threat that terrorists pose to national
   security. He has called for liberals to address the issue of cultural
   identity, arguing that multiculturalism cannot extend to tolerating
   intolerance or turning a blind eye to segregated communities.

   There are reasons to be cautious about both candidates. Mr Clegg has
   run a flat campaign, and was rattled when his rival attacked him. He
   is the more natural communicator, but comparisons with David Cameron,
   the Conservative leader, are not yet justified. His promise of a "new
   kind of politics" echoes similar pledges by politicians who went on to
   revert to partisan point-scoring, including Mr Cameron. Nor does Mr
   Huhne inspire total confidence. His support for massively shrinking
   Britain's nuclear deterrent seems rash, and he is also unduly alarmist
   about public-service reform.

   All in all, however, the Lib Dems are lucky in their candidates; and
   partly as a result, the party is picking up in the polls. They are
   luckier still in their acting leader. Mr Cable--who coined the single
   best line of Gordon Brown's premiership this week when he pointed out
   that the prime minister had metamorphosed from being Stalin to Mr
   Bean--is having a very good war.

