
   Video games: New furniture, controllers and screens are helping to
   make video games even more immersive and realistic



   AUDRA MCIVER, a publicist, was attending the New York Toy Fair in
   February when she came across a display of gaming chairs--seats
   designed specifically for playing video games. She sat down to try
   one, and the experience proved to be so engrossing that she remained
   in the chair, glued to the screen and playing "Project Gotham Racing
   3", for several hours. Passers by began asking her for product
   details, thinking she worked for the chair's manufacturer, at which
   point she realised just how long she had been sitting in it. "That was
   a great chair--I just loved it," she recalls.

   Most gamers are quite happy to sit on a sofa or a beanbag when playing
   "Gears of War" or "Grand Theft Auto". But as other aspects of gaming
   become more realistic, from high-definition graphics to vibrating
   controllers, manufacturers sense an opportunity to offer dedicated
   gaming furniture, controllers designed for specific gaming genres and
   new types of fancy screens.

   The Raptor, for example, made by the Ultimate Game Chair company, has
   built-in speakers and features 12 motors that provide a full-body
   version of the vibration effects delivered through hand-held
   controllers. Pyramat's S5000 Sound Rocker is another chair with
   built-in speakers; it uses wireless technology to beam the audio
   signals from the console. The Nethrone goes further: it is an
   ergonomic seat in an adjustable chrome frame which doubles as a
   monitor stand. The whole thing looks like a machine for subjecting
   astronauts to high G-forces, but is meant to allow gamers to play
   while reclining in comfort.

   Fancy controllers are another way to increase the realism of certain
   games. Racing games found in arcades have steering wheels and pedals;
   wheels such as Logitech's NASCAR Racing Wheel can now be bought for
   use at home by those truly obsessed with driving simulators. The same
   is true of joysticks. The most advanced models, such as the
   ThrustMaster Top Gun Afterburner Force Feedback made by Guillemot, now
   resemble those found in fighter aircraft in their layout and
   complexity.

   The popularity of the "Guitar Hero" series of games, in which players
   must press coloured buttons in time with classic rock tracks, means
   that many televisions in gaming households now have small, plastic
   electric-guitar controllers propped up next to them. "Rock Band", a
   game in a similar vein that will be released later this year, will
   have bass-guitar and drum-kit controllers, too. Players may look
   ridiculous, but they would not enjoy such games nearly as much without
   these special controllers.

   A lot of innovation is also going on in the field of displays. PC
   gamers tend to sit right in front of their screens while gaming,
   whereas console gamers tend to sit a bit further away. Sitting close
   to a large display, be it a monitor or a widescreen television,
   provides a particularly immersive experience, because the game
   occupies almost all of the player's field of vision. Taking that a
   step further, Matrox, a Canadian firm that makes display cards for
   PCs, has devised "TripleHead2Go". This is a box that combines three
   separate monitors so that they behave like a single, very large, very
   wide monitor. In games with a first-person perspective, such as
   "Unreal" or "Half-Life 2", the monitors can then be arranged to mimic
   peripheral vision. And flight-simulator fans can simulate the view
   from an aircraft's cockpit windows.

   Mitsubishi, meanwhile, is adding a new feature called "Game FX" to its
   ultra-large DLP televisions (which measure up to 73 inches
   diagonally). This will double the usual frame-rate to enable two
   separate sets of images to be interleaved. Using special glasses,
   players can alternate between images for the right and left eyes, so
   that the television becomes a three-dimensional display, at least for
   games that support this feature.

   A different approach to immersion comes from Philips, which includes a
   technology called amBX in some of its televisions. Its main feature is
   "ambient lighting", in which lights behind and around the screen bathe
   the room with the same hues shown on screen. Also available are extra
   speakers, fans and vibration packs, all of which can be triggered when
   necessary by suitably programmed games. Several video-game publishers,
   including Codemasters, Gearbox Software and THQ, have agreed to
   support the technology.

   Where will it all end? Harvey Smith, a respected game designer who has
   worked on titles including "System Shock" and "Thief", says the most
   immersive experiences depend not on fancy technology, but on good
   design, and the ability to create a coherent and believable game
   world. Despite all the gadgets that are now available, he says,
   "nothing is as immersive as a good book."

