
   New plans for detaining suspects have been rushed out. Why the hurry?

   "A MORE comprehensively consensual approach than we have ever taken
   before" was promised six months ago, when the government announced its
   fifth counter-terrorism bill in eight years. Previous bills had been
   piloted through Parliament at top speed, dividing MPs and in some
   cases leading to legislation that breached human-rights laws. This
   time a soothing consultation period and cross-party co-operation would
   prevent squabbling and mistakes, ministers pledged.

   The consensus approach now seems to be on the rocks. On December 6th
   the home secretary, Jacqui Smith, called an emergency press conference
   to announce plans to hold suspected terrorists for longer before
   charging them, a power long coveted by the government and opposed by
   other parties. Opposition MPs, who say they were shown the detailed
   plans no earlier than journalists were, accused the government of
   "pig-headed stubbornness". On the contrary, Ms Smith retorted, it is
   they who have refused to compromise.

   Sensing widespread hostility to a permanent increase in the current
   28-day limit, the government now proposes to give the home secretary
   the power to increase it temporarily, subject to various safeguards.
   The new limit would be 42 days: it could be invoked for just two
   months and only with the approval of police, prosecutors and
   Parliament. A judge would also have to agree to each suspect's
   continued detention each week. The temporary nature of the extension
   makes it similar to the emergency powers already available under the
   Civil Contingencies Act 2004, Ms Smith claims.

   The new plan has a whiff of hasty drafting about it. One odd feature
   is that even if Parliament voted against a 42-day extension, it would
   remain in place for a month. Given that a suspect would probably have
   been held for a couple of weeks before the extension was invoked, he
   could end up being detained for a full 42 days despite Parliament's
   opposition.

   Another worry is that MPs would not be permitted to hear evidence that
   could prejudice a subsequent trial, so their vote would in effect be
   blind. Liberty, a civil-rights outfit, points out too that whereas
   existing emergency powers can be struck down by a court if they are
   applied illegally, the proposed new powers would be "primary
   legislation" and therefore immune to judicial review. Reports by the
   parliamentary Home Affairs and Human Rights committees on December
   13th and 14th found no reason to go beyond 28 days.

   The puzzle is why the government has provoked this fight now. The
   doughty Ms Smith has plenty on her plate already, including a tussle
   with the police over a miserly pay settlement that has provoked
   demands from some officers for the right to strike. The prime
   minister, Gordon Brown, himself buffeted by bad news lately, may have
   his own reasons for moving early on the matter (see [3]Bagehot). But
   there may be even shorter-term reasons. Ms Smith was expected to
   announce her plans after the Home Affairs Committee had made its
   recommendations; by pre-empting its report she stole a little of the
   initiative and perhaps hoped to bounce MPs into backing a version of
   her plan.

   If the proposals make it into the counter-terrorism bill, which is
   expected early next year, Mr Brown will need to quash dissent in his
   own ranks if it is to pass. An attempt by his predecessor to extend
   the limit to 90 days earned Tony Blair one of his two parliamentary
   defeats. On December 11th Frank Dobson, a normally loyal Labour MP,
   held a meeting with rebellious colleagues to discuss mounting an
   insurrection. Only a dozen turned up, but plotters claim that resolve
   elsewhere is firmer than expected. Optimists note that Ms Smith's
   announcement of the proposals was made in a press conference rather
   than in the House of Commons, which may mean that they are not yet set
   in stone. They must hope to face her down before her plan becomes part
   of a bill; if they fail, a bigger showdown looms.

