
   The shadow of an old accident haunts Britain's nuclear revival


   THIS is a big week in the government's attempt to rehabilitate nuclear
   energy. Eight months after a court ruled that its first public
   consultation on whether to build more reactors had been misleading and
   unfair, its second attempt finished on October 10th. For a government
   with (until recently) a reputation for slick public relations, that
   date looks ill-judged. For it also marks the 50th anniversary of a
   fire at the Windscale nuclear reactor in Cumbria that was, until Three
   Mile Island in 1979, the world's worst atomic accident (the Chernobyl
   explosion in 1986 dwarfs both).

   The fire broke out during a maintenance operation and burned for over
   40 hours before engineers realised what was happening. At its height,
   11 tonnes of uranium fuel was burning at temperatures of up to 1,300
   degrees Celsius. A plume of radioactive smoke drifted south towards
   London, and east over Norway and Belgium. The fire was put out by
   drenching the reactor's core with water, a risky operation that could
   have caused a hydrogen explosion. The prime minister, Harold
   Macmillan, ordered the disaster hushed up.

   Experts insist that a repeat of the Windscale accident is extremely
   unlikely. The heat build-up that sparked the fire was caused by poor
   knowledge of reactor physics, which are much better understood today.
   The reactor itself--designed to produce plutonium for Britain's
   bombs--was full of flammable material and built with few of the safety
   features that modern power stations are laden with. Simon Taylor, an
   economist at Cambridge University's business school, argues that
   Windscale was good for Britain's nuclear industry, since it focused
   minds on safety.

   Such reassurances cut little ice with the public. According to Ipsos
   MORI, a polling outfit, public support for nuclear energy has risen
   over the past six years (see chart). More Britons now support nuclear
   power than oppose it. But despite official arguments about nuclear
   power's low-carbon nature and potential contribution to more secure
   electricity supplies, the rise in its popularity has hardly been
   dramatic. Support peaked in 2005 and has fallen since then, except
   among MPs--many of whom will merely be toeing the line of a government
   keen to see new plants built.

   Experts and pressure groups have tended to worry more in recent years
   about the cost of building reactors and how to dispose of the waste
   they generate than about safety risks, says Mr Taylor. But the public
   has very different priorities. While 55% of respondents cited waste
   disposal as a problem with nuclear power, 48% worried about a
   radiation leak and 46% about a nuclear accident. Only 13% cared about
   the potential cost.

   Environmental groups have dismissed the government's new consultation,
   arguing that its aim is to sell a policy that has already been decided
   upon rather than genuinely to canvass voters' views. Yet greens may
   have little to fear. The polls reveal a striking and pervasive public
   distrust of official information about nuclear power. Only scientists
   employed by universities, a few television-news programmes and
   environmental groups are trusted to tell the truth. Government
   scientists and cabinet ministers are widely disbelieved. The most
   distrusted figure of all is Gordon Brown himself, although the polling
   was conducted before he became prime minister. Since official sources
   have so little credibility, any attempt to sell nuclear energy to the
   public may end up sharpening people's doubts.

