
   A private rescue of the stricken bank looks ever more remote

                                                                   Landov

                                   Landov

   THE first rule of being in a hole is the simplest: stop digging. Yet
   it is the hardest to follow. Ever since the government decided in
   September to bail out Northern Rock, a British mortgage lender that
   had run out of ready cash, it has been delving ever deeper. A line of
   credit intended to tide the bank over for a few months ballooned so
   hugely that the Bank of England is now owed around £25 billion ($50
   billion). And, after guaranteeing deposits in order to stop the first
   bank run in Britain since 1866, Alistair Darling, the chancellor of
   the exchequer, has since been forced to guarantee more and more of its
   debts.

   On December 18th the government moved closer towards what is, in
   effect, the nationalisation of Northern Rock when it extended its
   guarantee to cover almost all the bank's wholesale debts. What this
   means is that the Treasury is now directly guaranteeing about a third
   of the mortgage lender's liabilities, which are a bit over £100
   billion. That is on top of the £25 billion loan from the Bank of
   England. In all, the government's commitment to the bank has now
   reached the stomach-churning figure of over £55 billion.

   The support for Northern Rock is far larger than any likely call on
   taxpayers' money, which would result from losses at the bank. But the
   question that matters is whether the government's strategy has become
   broken-backed. Mr Darling may hope that he is buying time until a
   private buyer can be found to take it off taxpayers' hands. But that
   hope is looking less and less realistic as money markets remain
   dislocated and fearful.

   Wishful thinking

   Indeed, the bank run that began in mid-September has not yet been
   halted. The haemorrhage of retail deposits has slowed. Between £5m and
   £10m is understood to be flowing out of customer accounts each day,
   compared with more than £200m on some days in November. However, the
   wholesale depositors and money-market participants on which Northern
   Rock relies for most of its funding have remained fickle. Without the
   new guarantee, billions of pounds might have been pulled out of the
   bank in the closing days of 2007.

   Attempts to sell Northern Rock are looking less and less feasible,
   since they require a hefty refinancing operation from banks that are
   in no mood to take on risky business. Although two bidders have
   emerged--Richard Branson's Virgin Group and Olivant, headed by Luqman
   Arnold who once ran Abbey National, a large British mortgage
   lender--neither has managed to borrow the £10 billion-15 billion they
   would need to start repaying the Bank of England's loan. Nor, it
   seems, have they come up with viable plans to repay the rest of the
   money before 2010. One proposal apparently rests on the astonishing
   assumption that Northern Rock would be able to win a 25% share of
   British retail deposits over the next three years.

   On December 14th the Treasury asked Goldman Sachs, an investment bank,
   to see if it could line up a group of banks willing to finance the
   stricken mortgage lender. Few hold out much faith that it can succeed
   where others have failed. Some of the leading investment bankers in
   London, from firms including Citigroup, Merrill Lynch and Blackstone,
   have done little else for the past three months.

   All hopes for a sale of Northern Rock now rest on two conditions, both
   of which seem unlikely. The first is a quick thawing in credit markets
   early in 2008 that would allow buyers to finance their bids. That
   looks optimistic, despite central-bank intervention to bring down
   elevated interbank interest rates.

   The second--that Northern Rock's shareholders agree to a deal that
   dilutes their stake in the bank--also looks improbable. SRM, a hedge
   fund, has recently increased its stake in Northern Rock to almost 10%
   and is understood to be keen to buy even more. It is calling for a
   shareholders' meeting (which may be announced early in 2008) and has
   also threatened to block any deal which it feels undervalues the bank.
   It knows well that the government can do little to coerce shareholders
   into accepting a sale of Northern Rock short of threatening to
   nationalise the bank or cutting off its funding, in which case it
   would go bust, an unattractive political choice.

   SRM's grandstanding strengthens the case for proposals by Mervyn King,
   the governor of the Bank of England, to remedy the absurd situation
   Britain finds itself in: it is the only country in the G7 without a
   special mechanism for dealing with distressed banks. In addition to a
   new system of deposit insurance, Mr King wants an agency that could
   take control of struggling lenders to protect deposits and then sell
   their assets.

   Such proposals suggest that the right lessons are now being learned
   from Northern Rock; they need to be introduced without delay. Yet the
   most pressing priority is to sort out the mess at the mortgage lender.
   The least undesirable way to deal with it may now be to take the bank
   into public ownership, in order to remove the veto of shareholders.
   That need not involve a long-term commitment, if buyers can be found
   for the bank's book. Mr Darling may still be striving to avoid
   nationalisation, but his quest looks ever more forlorn.

