
   Why the Bank of England may cut rates next month

   FORGET BC and AD. For the financial markets, the date dividing two
   eras is August 9th, when the financial markets seized up. Before then
   the City was sure that the base rate would rise this autumn to 6%.
   Instead, the Bank of England's rate-setters decided for the third
   month running to keep it at 5.75%, when they met on October 4th. As
   far as the City is concerned, the question now is not whether the base
   rate is coming down but when.

   The do-nothing decision by the bank's monetary-policy committee (MPC)
   may seem cautious, given that in America the Federal Reserve has
   already cut interest rates by half a percentage point. But the
   American economy has been weakening because of a sharp downturn in the
   housing market. In contrast, the British economy has been in fine
   fettle until this summer, not least because of the continuing buoyancy
   of house prices.

   The momentum of GDP growth before the financial turmoil of the past
   two months was underlined in recent official figures, which tweaked it
   up from 3.0% to 3.1% in the year to the second quarter. When the
   number-crunchers have completed all their revisions, recent growth may
   turn out to have been as fast as 3.5%, according to the bank. That's
   uncomfortably higher than the trend rate of 2.5-2.75% at a time when
   the economy has been operating at around full capacity.

   Already, however, there are signs that the economy is starting to
   slow. This week's surveys of purchasing managers indicated that the
   manufacturing and services sectors, though still performing well,
   weakened in September. A report from the Confederation of British
   Industry painted a particularly gloomy picture for the
   financial-services sector's prospects over the next three months.

   The housing market has remained surprisingly perky, but strains are
   beginning to appear there too. The number of mortgages approved for
   house purchase declined from 115,000 in July to 109,000 in August. In
   another sign that the market is slowing, house prices fell last month
   by 0.6% according to HBOS, a bank.

   More pain is likely, as credit conditions tighten because of the
   financial crisis. In the mortgage market, borrowers seeking two-year
   fixed-rate loans worth 95% of a home's value are now paying sharply
   more than those who need to finance only 75%. And companies have been
   hit hard: those taking out new loans at interest rates fixed for up to
   a year were charged 7.63% in August, up from 6.63% in June.

   As a result, the economic outlook is darkening. According to The
   Economist's poll of forecasters (see [3]article), GDP growth is now
   expected to slow quite substantially, from 2.9% this year to 2.1% in
   2008. The outcome could be even grimmer. Growth will slip to 1.4% next
   year, says CEBR, an outfit that keeps a close eye on the City, whose
   fortunes have taken a turn for the worse. As further evidence emerges
   that the economy is going to slow sharply, the MPC is likely to cut
   rates sooner rather than later. Relief may come as early as November.

