
   Transport: After a long gestation, ground-effect vehicles that fly on
   cushions of air could finally be ready for take-off

   WALK along the River Warnow, in northern Germany, and you may be lucky
   enough to spot a SeaFalcon, a sleek, white machine with two
   propellers, two wings and a distinctly un-birdlike tail. It looks like
   an aircraft. Which is what it is. Except, it isn't. It is a ship--at
   least in the eyes of the International Marine Organisation, which
   regulates such things. That matters, because ships are much more
   lightly regulated than aircraft.

   The SeaFalcon is really a ground-effect vehicle. It flies only over
   water and only two metres above that water. This means the air beneath
   its wings is compressed, giving it additional lift. In effect, it is
   floating on a cushion of air. That makes it far cheaper to run than a
   plane of equivalent size, while the fact that it is flying means it is
   far faster--at 80-100 knots--than a ship of any size. Its designer,
   Dieter Puls, thus hopes it will fill a niche for the rapid transport
   of people and light goods in parts of the world where land and sea
   exist in similar proportions.

   The theory of ground-effect vehicles goes back to the 1920s, when Carl
   Wieselsberger, a German physicist, described how the ground effect
   works. There was then a period of silence, followed by a false start.
   In the 1960s the Soviet armed forces thought that ground-effect
   vehicles would be ideal for shifting heavy kit around places like the
   Black Sea. Their prototypes did fly, but were never deployed in
   earnest--and their jet engines consumed huge amounts of fuel.

   This did, however, prove that the idea worked. And two German
   engineers, Mr Puls and Hanno Fischer (whose version is called Airfish
   8), have taken it up and made it work by using modern, composite
   materials for the airframes, and propellers rather than jets for
   propulsion. One reason the Soviet design was so thirsty is that the
   power needed to lift a ground-effect vehicle is far greater than that
   needed to sustain it in level flight. The Soviet design used heavy jet
   engines to deliver the power needed for take-off. But the SeaFalcon
   uses a hydrofoil to lift itself out of the water, and Airfish 8 uses
   what Mr Fischer calls a hoverwing--a system of pipes that takes air
   which has passed through the propeller and blasts it out under the
   craft during take-off.

   The next stage, of course, is to begin production in earnest--and that
   seems to be about to happen. Mr Puls says he has signed a deal with an
   Indonesian firm for an initial order of ten, while both he and Mr
   Fischer are in discussions with Wigetworks, a Singaporean company,
   with a view to starting production next year. South-East Asia, with
   its plethora of islands and high rate of economic growth is just the
   sort of place where ground-effect vehicles should do well.

   All of which sounds optimistic. But a note of caution is needed. For
   another sort of ground-effect vehicle was also expected to do well and
   ended up going nowhere. The hovercraft differed from the vehicles
   designed by Messrs Puls and Fischer in that it relied on creating its
   own cushion of air, rather than having one provided naturally. That
   meant it could go on land as well as sea--which was thought at the
   time (the 1950s) to be a winning combination. Sadly, it was not.
   Hovercraft have almost disappeared. But then, in the eyes of the
   regulators, they counted as aircraft.

