
   Migrants' remittances help ease poverty back home, but they are not a
   cure-all

   SEVEN years into the century a remarkable figure was produced.
   Foreigners in America sent home $275m in a single year, a total not
   far short of the value of all the gold mined in America. They used
   2,625 money agents to do so, mostly through grocers, bakers and other
   small immigrant shops. New York alone had 500, Chicago 75 and
   Pittsburgh 50. The New York Times gasped at the numbers a little
   later, in 1910, and noted that migrants were shunning bigger banks as
   "the Italian and the Magyar and the Croat and the Slovak [are] simple,
   ignorant foreigners".

                  Flying money in the Seven Sisters Road 

   The sum of $275m in 1907 was $6.2 billion in today's money. That
   sounds a lot until you look at the current figures, which are probably
   in the region of $240 billion-300 billion. Neglected for some time by
   academics and policymakers, remittances have recently been
   rediscovered and have become the darling of many development experts.

   Because of fears after September 11th 2001 that terrorists might be
   using informal money transfers to fund their activities, agents had to
   register and submit to closer monitoring. For a flavour of what the
   Arabs call hawala and the Chinese fei ch'ien, or flying money, try
   north London's Seven Sisters Road. With 105 different ethnic groups,
   north London is thought to be Britain's most diverse area, and at
   first glance most of the 2,700 remittance agents registered in the
   country as a whole seem to congregate here. "JN" promises Jamaicans
   that "As yu quint it reach" (once sent, your money is there). "Giros
   sur" specialises in Brazil, Chile and Venezuela; "Maggie Gold" serves
   Ghana. "Homeboy, Instant transfer" is doing good business.

   The agents are wedged between halal butchers, Chinese herb shops,
   Greek dry-cleaners and bustling grocers selling green bananas, cassava
   and sweet potatoes. Pavements are crowded with shoppers and crooning
   preachers. A sign in one shop, hand-written in Luganda, invites "all
   our people, come all. We send money to Uganda at a good rate, here in
   the internet café of the Somalis." Another agent, with a line of phone
   booths, has a dozen clocks on the wall, showing the time in places
   like Sebastopol, Addis Ababa, Kinshasa, Johannesburg and New Delhi.

   According to the clock in London, it is 3pm in Kampala, Uganda's
   capital, when Julius Mucunguzi hands over £20 intended for his sister.
   His receipt says she will be able to collect 64,800 Ugandan shillings
   from the firm's partner office in downtown Kampala. There is no fee,
   she can get at the cash almost immediately and the exchange rate is
   reasonable (though the agent will make a profit on it). Mr Mucunguzi
   sends her a text message with a code that she will use to collect the
   money. These texts are now treasured back home. When friends and
   relatives need help, they plead: "Send me a number!"

   The mechanism is relatively simple. The money agent needs an office in
   London, say, to collect the cash and take details of the person
   sending it, and another in the destination country to hand over the
   money. The internet provides a safe and easy means of sending the
   code, specifying the amount and checking rates. The agent may invest
   the money he has been paid in London in some other business, or buy
   goods to be exported for sale in, say, Uganda (secondhand cars are
   popular), where the profits are used to pay salaries and provide the
   cash to be paid out locally. Trust is vital to this business, and
   reputations are made, and spread, by word of mouth among émigrés. Most
   agents are registered, but a few illicit ones drum up trade by
   offering good rates. Some even lend cash for the migrant to send, with
   repayment required only on confirmation that it has been collected.

   Banks find it hard to compete with this kind of personal service. A
   Bangladeshi in Ireland complains that it takes two weeks to send money
   home through the bank, compared with half an hour via Western Union.
   Banks may also lack the necessary infrastructure, and may feel that
   frequent small transfers are not worthwhile.

   For most poor countries remittances are more valuable than aid. For
   many they provide more than aid and foreign direct investment
   combined. According to the World Bank's Dilip Ratha, an expert on
   remittances, small countries gain most: migrants' cash accounts for
   27% of Tonga's GDP, he estimates, and 21% of Haiti's (see chart 4 for
   other examples where it matters even more).

   The total of global flows is disputed. The World Bank talks of $240
   billion a year whereas a recent report by IFAD, an agriculture arm of
   the UN, claimed that $300 billion went to poor countries in 2006.
   Allowing for goods in kind and cash carried by travellers, perhaps one
   in ten people on the planet gains from remittances.

   Good as gold

   Remittances have many virtues. Sent directly to families, money cannot
   be stolen or frittered away by middlemen in aid agencies or
   governments. Flows are less volatile than aid or investment, and can
   be stepped up quickly if the need arises. For example, South-East
   Asians abroad sent extra cash home after the tsunami in 2004. Migrants
   often feel morally obliged to send money back. A survey of Mexicans in
   America in 2007, by the Inter-American Bank, found that three-quarters
   of them earned less than $20,000, yet on average they sent home $3,550
   a year. And not just for a short while: Kathleen Newland of the
   Migration Policy Institute in Washington, DC, points to a study of
   9,000 African doctors in America who sent home an average of $20,000 a
   year, some of them after 20 years away from home.

   Mr Mucunguzi in London certainly does his bit for Uganda, sending home
   several hundred pounds each month. Some of this pays for his
   grandfather to drink a litre of milk each day and for relatives'
   hospital bills. Some goes on education. He is "100% sure" that his
   sisters stayed on at school in Kampala only because of his cash. His
   parents sold land to fund his own education, so now he is building
   them a big new house. He is also investing in property, buying plots
   and houses in Kampala and in his home town, Kabale. Next he may set up
   a business, building a commercial centre and internet café in Kabale.

   His experience is typical. IFAD thinks that perhaps 90% of remittances
   to poor countries go on food, clothes, housing, education and health.
   A World Bank study in 2007, reviewing evidence from 115 poor countries
   in 2003, found that when official international remittances rose by
   10%, the share of people living on less than $1 a day fell by 3.5%.
   Countries such as Uganda, Bangladesh, Ghana and Nepal saw the biggest
   gains. Babies had a higher birth weight and families spent more on
   education, with girls thought to benefit especially. Consumption
   creates jobs too, for example in housing. Morocco's minister for
   émigrés, Mohammed Ameur, explains the advantages: "The impact is
   decisive, enormous, we have a construction boom across the country.
   This is an important safeguard against poverty and helps to modernise
   our rural society."

   Even so, remittances do not necessarily help those most in need. The
   biggest recipients are in fact middle-income countries; the most
   destitute places are usually remote from rich ones and send few
   migrants abroad. And recipient families are rarely the poorest within
   a given country, so remittances may end up in the hands of
   middle-income earners with few knock-on benefits for poorer
   neighbours.

   Remittance money flows along some curious routes: Pakistan receives
   some NKr350m ($5.7m) each year from migrants in Norway, with more
   perhaps carried by travellers. India collects $24 billion a year, more
   than any other country, yet its diaspora has been reluctant to invest
   in the home country because of corruption, red tape and tricky
   finance. As with aid, oil revenues and other unearned wealth, a flow
   of cash risks making recipients passive and dependent. The most
   extreme possibility is that remittances may indirectly help to ease
   domestic pressure on awful regimes. IFAD says that in 2006 Zimbabwe
   got $361m in cash transfers, Cuba $983m and North Korea a whopping
   $1.8 billion.

   At least more governments are thinking about using remittances to step
   up investment. India now offers special incentives to PIOs (people of
   Indian origin) to invest. Ethiopia, too, is tapping its diaspora in
   America, making investment easy. Other countries could do more to use
   the capital being sent home. Morocco should encourage rural
   investment, says Hein de Haas, a researcher at Oxford University.
   Farmers lack confidence in property rights, so they spend remittances
   on housing, not on irrigation. Mexico typically sees more than $20
   billion a year flow across the Rio Grande, yet only a quarter of the
   start-up capital for small businesses in its towns and cities is drawn
   from remittances.

   Wisely, governments in recipient countries have held off taxing the
   flows of cash, which would be a sure way to make them dry up. In the
   financial sector, remittances are an opportunity to extend banking
   services to more of the unbanked (who are not always the poorest) to
   encourage savings, insurance and loans. And where the cost of sending
   remittances is high, more competition could cut prices. Britain's
   government has set up a [3]website where rival remittance services can
   be compared. Where there is plenty of competition--from rich to
   middle-income or poor countries--the cost tends to be low. But sending
   money from one middle-income country to another can be painfully
   expensive.

