


   Gordon Brown struggles to keep his footing as another crisis erupts

   [3]Gordon Brown

   TONY BLAIR, after years as Britain's prime minister, remarked recently
   that religion and politics don't mix: a leader who invokes his faith
   is, he lamented, considered a "nutter". For his successor, Gordon
   Brown, reconciling politics and God must seem a breeze compared with
   reconciling politics and money. Less than two months after the police
   dropped investigations into whether parties had offered peerages in
   exchange for loans, another money scandal is gripping Westminster.

   The latest is a labyrinthine affair, and potentially devastating for
   Mr Brown. Since 2003 David Abrahams, a property developer from the
   north-east, has donated a total of over £650,000 ($1.3m) to the Labour
   Party through intermediaries including two employees, the wife of
   another and his solicitor. He claims to have done this to protect his
   privacy but, under the tighter rules introduced by this government,
   making donations in someone else's name is unlawful. On November 26th
   Peter Watt, the general secretary of the Labour Party, admitted that
   he knew about the arrangement, and resigned. Mr Brown, who claims not
   to have known, has promised to return the money.

   Unfortunately for Labour, the mess does not stop there. On November
   27th it emerged that Jon Mendelsohn, the party's chief fundraiser and
   recruited in September by Mr Brown himself, knew of Mr Abrahams's
   indirect donations too, although he was unhappy about them.

   Questions have also arisen about contributions during the contest for
   Labour's deputy leadership last summer. Janet Kidd, Mr Abrahams's
   secretary, gave £5,000 to Hilary Benn, one of the candidates, who
   returned it after being tipped off that Mr Abrahams was the real
   source of the money. Mr Benn then took the same sum from Mr Abrahams
   directly. But Harriet Harman, the winning candidate, did accept a
   £5,000 donation from Ms Kidd, apparently without realising its true
   provenance. The spectacle of a donor giving money to different
   candidates under different names is odd enough; many wonder how Ms
   Harman could not have known what Mr Benn knew. The question is acute
   as she is married to Labour's treasurer, Jack Dromey, who says that he
   too was out of the loop. She is returning the money but Mr Brown's
   support for her has so far been nuanced.

   Others are being dragged in too. In 2006 the Highways Agency lifted
   its block on a planning application for a new commercial centre in the
   north-east to be built by associates of Mr Abrahams. The government
   denies that ministers played any role in the decision, but promises to
   investigate the matter.

   Party-finance rows are not confined to the Labour Party: the
   Conservatives received more money in undeclared loans before the last
   general election than Labour did, and the Liberal Democrats took money
   from a convicted perjurer. Indeed, it is due in part to Labour's
   efforts to make the system more transparent that chicanery is now
   evident. But whatever the context, a law has been broken. The
   Electoral Commission is investigating further and has consulted the
   Crown Prosecution Service. A police investigation may follow.

   The funding fiasco has hit a prime minister who was already short of
   political capital. Mr Brown's honeymoon with the electorate was at its
   dreamiest during the Labour Party conference in September. Since then
   he has endured the botched handling of a possible snap election, the
   messy rescue of Northern Rock, a mortgage lender, and the loss by the
   customs and revenue office of 25m people's personal data. His
   reputation for competence has suffered horribly; he cannot now afford
   to lose his reputation for probity.

   A Major legacy

   Mr Brown is often likened to William Gladstone for his intellect and
   compares himself to Margaret Thatcher as a conviction politician. The
   analogy that commentators now draw with Sir John Major, the most
   recent Tory prime minister, will hurt. Mr Brown's premiership is not
   yet doomed, as Sir John's was, to be a fire-fighting postscript to
   that of a more illustrious predecessor. Sir John suffered a steady
   trickle of bad news over several years; Mr Brown has had a
   concentrated deluge of disasters, and the weather may improve as
   suddenly as it worsened. Unlike Sir John, he leads a stable government
   with a comfortable majority in Parliament. And whereas Sir John's
   opposition turned his woes into unassailable poll leads, the Tories
   have not yet definitively raced over the horizon.

   Yet in other ways Mr Brown's fate may be worse than Sir John's. The
   latter at least won an election (and by a good margin in the popular
   vote, though not in parliamentary seats). Ever fewer pundits believe
   Mr Brown will do the same. And Sir John left a tangible legacy. The
   economic expansion that continues to this day began under him, as did
   the fall in crime. He introduced market reforms into the public
   sector, and even his policy towards the European Union (remaining
   outside the euro but sufficiently involved to push for eastward
   expansion) has been broadly vindicated.

   By contrast, it is hard to know how Britain will be different after Mr
   Brown's time in office, though this is partly because he has already
   served a decade as chancellor of the exchequer. He harbours a few big
   ideas, such as extending the school-leaving age to 18, but seems
   disappointingly keen on diluting Mr Blair's promising public-service
   reforms. A sense of direction enables governments to stay on their
   feet when times are tough. Mr Brown must acquire one if his
   premiership is to recover.

