
   A convenient diary mix-up proves embarrassing for the prime minister

   [3]Gordon Brown

   IT DID not take long for the "Macavity" jibes to start, once word
   spread that an unconvincing diary clash would prevent Gordon Brown
   from attending a ceremony in Lisbon to sign the European Union's
   controversial reform treaty. When it subsequently emerged that Mr
   Brown would fly to Lisbon on December 13th anyway, to sign the treaty
   discreetly after the main ceremony had finished, the jokes gave way to
   head-shaking disbelief in several capitals.

   Westminster insiders long ago began to notice that Mr Brown has a
   talent for not being there when trouble hits. Lord Turnbull, once
   Britain's top civil servant, merely put a name to it when he compared
   him last March to T.S. Eliot's fictional cat. Now Europeans are
   learning about this trait for themselves.

   The treaty is deeply unpopular in Britain. It is disliked both by
   those who fear that it undercuts their country's freedom of action in
   important respects and by those who resent being denied a referendum
   on it, even though one was promised by Tony Blair, Mr Brown's
   predecessor, on the constitution that the treaty largely re-packages.

   So while EU leaders prepared for a familiar ritual on December 13th
   (solemn signatures in some ancient palace--or, in this case, a
   monastery--followed by champagne toasts and speeches about European
   unity), Mr Brown announced that he could not miss a scheduled grilling
   by committee chairmen in the House of Commons. Only after that could
   he fly to Lisbon to catch the end of an EU leaders' lunch. At some
   point, during coffee perhaps, he would pop off and sign the treaty.

   Alas for Mr Brown, this grudging half-visit seems the worst of all
   worlds. Eurosceptics in Britain are enraged that Mr Brown is signing
   the treaty at all. In Brussels the prime minister's antics inspired
   embarrassment and puzzlement--not least when his aides insisted that
   the timing of the Lisbon ceremony was known too late to alter Mr
   Brown's diary. Pained European officials noted that Mr Brown was
   personally informed of the date, time and place of the ceremony in
   October by the prime minister of Portugal, which holds the current
   rotating presidency of the EU.

   Strictly speaking, diplomatic protocol did not require Mr Brown to be
   there--his foreign secretary, David Miliband, was already due in
   Lisbon for the ceremony, and ministers have signed treaties before.
   The Single European Act, for example--a more significant text--was
   signed by Lynda Chalker, then a junior minister. But the Portuguese
   had hoped that if national leaders signed the treaty in person, the
   symbolism of the event would draw a line under the crisis provoked in
   2005, when French and Dutch voters rejected the original constitution.

   Mr Brown's snub will be forgiven--in the end, Brussels folk see it as
   an internal problem, intelligible only to the British. But the
   dithering beforehand (unnamed British "sources" had hinted that he
   might not go to Lisbon at all) was more problematic, as was the
   lameness of his excuse. In diplomacy, indecision can be as harmful as
   the final decision taken.

