
   The meaning of Britain's favourite television programme



   IT IS hard to explain the enduring appeal of Bruce
   Forsyth--especially, perhaps, to anyone who isn't British. Mr Forsyth,
   who turns 80 next month, sports a silly toupee and an elongated chin.
   The jokes he makes in his high-camp nasal voice are too naff for
   reproduction in an upmarket newspaper. Yet Mr Forsyth is the
   improbable face of Britain's favourite television programme.

   Twelve million viewers saw him compere the finale of "Strictly Come
   Dancing" on December 22nd. The programme has water-cooler status in
   Britain, but is also a runaway hit abroad: the format has been
   licensed to 27 countries (and counting), from Chile to China, Russia
   to Australia, mostly under the name "Dancing with the Stars".
   Scandinavians and east Europeans are especially fanatical about it,
   but Americans are keen too. All that makes it and Mr Forsyth telling
   indicators of global entertainment trends and, by comparison,
   Britain's peculiarities.

   Not all the indications are happy ones. Though few are as contagious
   as this programme, Britain is the world's biggest exporter of
   television formats. Many of the top ones combine the same game
   show/reality TV elements, in increasingly baroque combinations:
   participants who jostle for viewers' affection by singing, cooking,
   having sex, eating grubs, etc; presenters and pantomime judges to
   oversee their humiliation; and premium-rate voting by the audience to
   determine the winners. All these hybrids and spin-offs can make it
   seem that viewers' choices are contracting, even as the number of
   channels multiplies.

   The latter-day gladiators in many of these shows are "celebrities": in
   "Strictly", as Mr Forsyth's programme is known among its British
   devotees, they are paired with professional dancers to compete against
   each other. Different sorts of people, it seems, count as celebrities
   in different places. In America, for example, one of them was an
   entrepreneur (not very likely in Britain). The last British series
   featured a balding ex-snooker player (not very likely in America).
   Many of the British contestants previously appeared in the sort of
   miserabilist soap operas, set in launderettes and fish-and-chip shops,
   which mystify American visitors. But some are has-beens and
   never-beens who gain celebrity status by appearing in programmes like
   this one. This model of celebrity--a shabby, evanescent thing,
   confected and disposable, harmless maybe but a bit depressing--has
   also been developed in Britain, and seems to be spreading too.

   For all that, there is something heartening about the way the
   programme has galvanised the international public. Heartening and--for
   others in the marketing business who fail to generate quite the same
   excitement, such as politicians--instructive.

   To see you, nice

   During his recent spell as acting leader of the Liberal Democrats,
   Vince Cable made some famously witty attacks on Gordon Brown. But the
   highlight of his stint, Mr Cable said when it ended, was dancing with
   the eventual winner of Strictly, even if it was "infinitely more
   nerve-wracking than standing up in the House of Commons". Politicians,
   he added, could learn a lot from such TV shows, which motivate
   millions of viewers to vote for their favourite performers, and pay
   for the privilege (Mr Brown, meanwhile, says he prefers watching
   sport).

   Part of the lesson may be that, whereas politics is remote and
   political parties confusingly similar, here the choice is clear, each
   vote counts equally, and the impact of voting is tangible and
   immediate. Like the renegade Victorian juries who compassionately
   acquitted pickpockets, British audiences tend to reward sweet if
   patently unco-ordinated underdogs while disposing of contestants who
   are too obviously trying to win. Mr Cable's victorious dance partner
   was an ex-pop star, who in one episode was brought tea and cake by her
   grannies.

   A facile conclusion might be that real elections should be conducted
   by phone, text message and other new media, like television voting.
   Yet Strictly's success probably rests less on its modernity than on
   its old-fashionedness. It is, at bottom, a cheesy variety show
   camouflaged as reality-TV. Beneath the razzmatazz and interactive
   paraphernalia, its central ingredient--as improbable as Mr Forsyth--is
   the dancing itself. Because of the programme's contagious spread, tens
   of millions of people around the world are newly fluent in the arcane
   vocabulary of samba, paso doble, cha-cha-cha and one-handed lifts
   (rather as obscure sports such as diving and curling suddenly become
   mainstream interests during the Olympics).

   Dancing, of course, is in part a proxy for sex--and in the case of
   some of the contestants, apparently a prologue to it as well. The
   sequinned costumes--said by some carpers to be much less snazzy in
   Britain than in America--are long on fake-tanned flesh and short
   everywhere else. But the programme also offers something almost
   equally primal that, in Britain at least, may help to explain its
   draw: a sense of community, of being part of a national event--a
   feeling that television used to provide routinely before viewers'
   attention was fragmented. In Britain, where social atomisation is
   perhaps more keenly felt than elsewhere, it also offers Mr Forsyth.

   He started on the stage during the second world war, tap-dancing and
   playing the accordion as "Boy Bruce, the mighty Atom", and still sings
   and tap-dances in the amateurish, have-a-go way that British audiences
   love. He has made a couple of forays to America, where his innocent
   innuendoes and music-hall style rather flopped. But on his home turf,
   Mr Forsyth and the meaningless catchphrases he has developed during
   his 50 years as a television host (sample: "Nice to see you--to see
   you, nice!"), are cherished precisely because they are throwbacks. He
   and "Strictly" captivate the millions of Britons who long for some
   things, at least, to stay the same, and whose secret idea of heaven is
   still dancing the Viennese waltz in a seaside hotel.

