
   Unpaid subsidies provoke calls for blood

   ONE of Labour's successes in office has been its management of
   Britain's economy. But when it comes to more prosaic administrative
   matters, its record is muckier. A string of procurement disasters,
   diligently catalogued by spending watchdogs and parliamentary
   committees, give the impression of chronic incompetence in project
   management. More evidence came on March 29th, when a committee of MPs
   issued a scathing report on the Rural Payments Agency (RPA), which is
   meant to distribute £1.5 billion of European Common Agricultural
   Policy (CAP) subsidies to British farmers.

   The mess was some time in the making. In 2003 the European Commission
   reformed the CAP, replacing production subsidies with a single payment
   based on farm size, leaving the RPA in need of a new payment system.
   Officials at the Department for Environment, Food and Rural Affairs
   (DEFRA), decided to merge the new system with an existing programme of
   cost-cutting, begun in 2001 and carried out with the help of
   Accenture, a consultancy.

   Chaos followed. The government missed its own payment deadline of
   December 2005, as well as a later commitment to pay 96% of the
   outstanding claims by March 2006. As recently as last December, around
   500 farmers were still waiting for their money. Suddenly and
   unexpectedly deprived of a large chunk of their income, many struggled
   to cope. "This saga has cost farmers £20m of their own money, and
   untold stress," says Peter Kendall, head of the National Farmers'
   Union.

   The catalogue of failures will be familiar to anyone who has followed
   the dolorous saga of British government procurement. Contracts were
   changed after being signed, communication between DEFRA, the RPA and
   Accenture was poor, systems were overly complicated and oversight was
   lax. More unusual is the fact that the MPs are so very cross. "If
   accountability is to mean anything at all," they say rather pompously,
   "then all those responsible for the RPA failure should consider their
   positions." One scalp has already been claimed: Johnston McNeill, the
   RPA's boss, was forced out in March 2006. Others, however, have so far
   escaped punishment. Margaret Beckett, in charge of DEFRA at the time,
   is now the foreign secretary; Sir Brian Bender, DEFRA's most senior
   civil servant, has moved over to the Department for Trade and
   Industry.

   This fuss may seem overdone given the fact that farming now makes up
   only around 1% of Britain's economy. But the rest of the country may
   come to rue DEFRA's incompetence. The EU seems likely to fine Britain
   for its late payments, and the Treasury has set aside £300m to cover
   it.

