
   An intriguing plea deal in America has big implications for Britain

   IF BRITISH businessmen were worried before, they are positively
   quaking now, wondering who will be seized next by the ever-extending
   arm of American law. On December 10th Conrad Black, a Canadian turned
   British peer, was sentenced in Chicago to six and a half years in jail
   for embezzling $6.1m (£3m) from his Hollinger media empire. A
   fortnight earlier, three British bankers pleaded guilty in a federal
   court in Houston to wire fraud related to the Enron affair, after
   being extradited from Britain to face trial.

   Both the so-called "NatWest Three", who are due to be sentenced in
   February, and Lord Black, who once controlled more than 200 newspapers
   around the globe, including Britain's Daily Telegraph, the Jerusalem
   Post and the Chicago Sun-Times, now face the prospect of a spell in
   one of America's less than salubrious jails, where sexual assault and
   drug-fuelled violence are often rife. Foreigners are not eligible for
   a minimum-security prison, but Lord Black is hoping at least for the
   gentler conditions of the next grade up--a low-security institution.

   But help for British white-collar crooks caught in America's legal net
   may be on the way. Under an unprecedented plea agreement involving the
   Department of Justice and Britain's Office of Fair Trading (OFT),
   three British oil executives, who pleaded guilty in a Houston court
   this week to price-fixing, are being permitted to return to Britain
   next week. They have agreed that, once back, they will allow
   themselves to be re-arrested and re-charged by the British authorities
   with an almost identical offence, to which they will again plead
   guilty.

   Peter Whittle, a consultant, and Bryan Allison and David Brammar, both
   of Dunlop Oil & Marine, a firm that makes equipment for the oil and
   gas industry, are accused of conspiring between 1999 and 2007 to fix
   the prices of hundreds of millions of dollars worth of marine hoses
   used to transfer oil between tankers and storage facilities. The
   charge is of price-fixing on a global scale, which affected both the
   American and the British markets.

   Under America's Sherman Antitrust Act, they could have faced up to ten
   years in jail. Under English competition law, the maximum penalty for
   price-fixing is half that. According to the men's still-secret plea
   deal with the American authorities, they are understood to have
   negotiated jail terms of around two years or less, which they will be
   allowed to serve in Britain provided the sentence imposed by the
   English courts is at least as long. If it is not, the Americans
   reserve the right to seek the men's extradition back to the United
   States to serve the remainder of their American sentence there.

   Alistair Graham, a partner at White & Case, finds the deal a
   "fascinating development". His law firm is fighting another
   extradition case, that of Ian Norris, a British executive facing
   price-fixing charges on the other side of the Atlantic. "The British
   and American prosecuting authorities have been developing an
   increasingly close relationship in recent years." Both he and others
   worry, however, that this new spirit of co-operation might "get in the
   way of British justice", putting pressure on British judges to hand
   out more severe American-style sentences.

   The differences may shrink anyway, for Britain itself, once thought a
   touch languid in the pursuit of white-collar crime, is chasing
   price-fixers more hotly these days. The offence became a crime in
   Britain only in 2002; if the oil men are indeed tried at home, it will
   be the first criminal prosecution for price-fixing in British history.
   The Dunlop deal could blaze a trail.

