
   Rich economies gain from high levels of migration, but the benefits
   are unevenly spread

   FOR the past two decades or so, high rates of immigration into OECD
   countries have coincided with prolonged economic growth in much of the
   Western world. Consider Cobh, a bustling tourist town in southern
   Ireland which used to be famous for exporting people. Some 2.5m
   Irishmen and women embarked for America from its quayside, and its
   great and gloomy neo-gothic cathedral was paid for by remittances.

                                                                  Reuters
                                                                  Reuters

                                                            They need her

   Now, like the rest of Ireland, Cobh heaves with foreign workers. There
   are Poles on building sites, Latvians who own a shop selling
   dumplings, sauerkraut and other continental delicacies, a South
   African in the tourist office and another driving a taxi, Chinese in
   restaurants, a Bangladeshi managing a fishing business, and so on. A
   hotel owner says that he could not do without the migrants: when he
   recently advertised for a receptionist, none of the 200 applicants was
   Irish.

   Migration can be both a consequence and a cause of economic
   well-being, but many people in host countries with lots of migrants
   have yet to be convinced of the economic benefits. A poll in November
   2007, for France 24, found that 55% of Spaniards consider migrants a
   boon for their economy, and so do 50% of Italians, but only 42% of
   Britons and Germans and a mere 30% of French respondents.

   Some of the hostility towards immigration seems linked to worries
   about the economy. If recession looms, locals are more afraid that
   outsiders will take their jobs or scrounge on their welfare systems.
   The last time that immigration in America was as high as it is now,
   just under a century ago, xenophobia rose as recession took hold.
   Today, amid concerns that a housing slide could lead to a general
   economic slump, American anxiety about migration is rising again. But
   the poor worry about immigration even when the economy is thriving.

   Legal migrants usually have better job prospects than illegal ones,
   and the more educated outdo the rest. Not all of them stay. Nearly a
   third of those who crossed the Atlantic to America between 1890 and
   1914--and as many as half the Spaniards and Italians--re-emigrated.
   Similarly, surveys today show that a majority of Poles in Britain plan
   to go home within a few years.

   Some migrants do better not only than those left behind but also than
   those in their destination countries. The Institute for Public Policy
   Research, a British think-tank, found in 2007 that the foreign-born of
   many ethnic groups are both more likely to have a job and to be better
   paid than the average Briton. In America, over the past century,
   studies have shown migrants' wages catching up with, and then often
   surpassing, those of average Americans. Migrants' children do well
   too. This is not surprising. Migrants need health, skills,
   determination, a willingness to take risks and some entrepreneurial
   nous to take the plunge, which marks them out as special people.

   Assuming that migrants are in work, they are bound to benefit the
   economy of the host country as a whole. Most simply, an expanding
   workforce permits faster growth. More people can do more work, and
   many migrants are young adults who are particularly productive.
   Moreover, migrants increasingly alleviate specific labour shortages in
   rich economies. Some economies could not function without foreign
   workers. In the United Arab Emirates, for instance, they make up an
   astonishing 85% of the population.

   For the moment few other countries rely so heavily on outsiders (see
   chart 2), but in a number of rich countries, including Britain and
   America, foreigners typically make up 10-15% of the labour force and
   their share is rising. Around half of the new jobs created in Britain
   today are filled by migrants, often because they have skills that
   locals lack (from plumbing to banking) or because natives scorn the
   work (from picking fruit to caring for the elderly).

   Low jobless rates in Ireland, Sweden, Britain, America and other
   countries with high migration suggest that, so far, foreigners are not
   squeezing out natives. Migrants also help to create jobs, because a
   good supply of labour encourages those with capital to invest more.
   For example, the hotel owner in Cobh, knowing he can find affordable
   staff, has added an extension with extra rooms. In contrast, countries
   where migrants have been kept at arm's length, such as Germany,
   complain about a chronic shortage of skilled workers such as
   engineers, scientists or programmers.

   Just say the word

   Foreign workers are often more flexible than native ones, too. Having
   already moved from Mexico to California, say, they are probably
   willing to take a job in Chicago. Migrant labour helps to keep
   economies on an even keel. At times of strong growth, an influx of
   workers reduces the risk of wage pressures and rising inflation. If
   growth weakens, migrants can go home or move to another country, or
   choose not to come in the first place. For example, the flow of
   Mexicans to America is probably slowing as the housing slump worsens
   and construction jobs disappear.

   Migrants can also release skilled natives to do a job (for example by
   providing child care that allows a parent to go back to work). And
   they are consumers, too, renting accommodation and buying goods and
   services. The owner of the off-licence in Cobh is delighted by his
   Polish customers, who are fond of bison grass vodka and east European
   lager. Cobh's supermarket, fast-food restaurants and other shops are
   flourishing too.

   Quantifying the impact of all this is tricky. A 2007 report by
   PricewaterhouseCoopers concluded that a surge in migration has helped
   to lift Britain's growth rate above its long-term trend. Alexandros
   Zavos, of the Hellenic Migration Policy Institute in Athens, reckons
   that immigration into Greece has recently added as much as 1.5-2.0% to
   its GDP every year. For countries that have long had high rates of
   immigration, such as America, sustained economic growth partly
   reflects an ever-growing workforce.

   Sceptics say that migration may boost the economy as a whole, but on a
   per-head basis the benefits for the natives are less impressive.
   Migrationwatch, an anti-migration group in Britain, reckons that for
   the average Briton the inflow of foreigners provides just a few extra
   pence a week. Roy Beck, an anti-immigrant activist in America,
   suggests that countries with ageing workforces should try to make
   their economies less labour-dependent. His country is "addicted to
   foreign labour", he says, and more capital investment and more
   training for locals would reduce the need for foreign workers. But
   some jobs (such as cleaning or nursing) cannot be sent abroad or
   mechanised. And even if more natives can be trained to do highly
   skilled work, shrinking native workforces in many countries could mean
   economic contraction.

   Some of the sceptics' arguments touch raw political nerves,
   particularly when it comes to the least well-off natives in the host
   country. In America the share of national income that is going to the
   poorest has been shrinking in recent decades. Inequality has increased
   and the real wages of the least skilled have fallen. Circumstantial
   evidence suggests that foreigners, who typically work in less skilled
   jobs, might be partly to blame. According to one estimate, they make
   up around 28% of legal construction workers in America and over a
   third of maids and housekeepers. If the illegal workers could be
   counted, the figures would probably be much higher still.

   Cheap and cheerful

   Do migrants make life worse for poor natives? Studies comparing wages
   in American cities with and without lots of foreigners suggest that
   they make little difference to the income of the poorest. George
   Borjas of Harvard University, who compared wages for different kinds
   of jobs where migrants most obviously compete with natives, estimated
   that immigration in America in the two decades to 2000 may have kept
   wages 3% lower than they would otherwise have been. For the least
   skilled the difference may have been as much as 8%. But Mr Borjas also
   calculated how a rise in the number of migrants might have encouraged
   the creation of jobs, which reduced the impact on wages.

   This tallies with the outcome of natural experiments in recent
   history, such as the influx of 610,000 Russian Jews into Israel in the
   early 1990s, the return of 900,000 Frenchmen from Algeria in 1962 or
   the homecoming of 600,000 Portuguese after the collapse of their
   empire in Africa in 1974-76. Each time the influx of workers expanded
   the workforce and wages dropped slightly, but subsequently recovered.
   Given prolonged immigration, argues Steven Camorata of the Centre for
   Immigration Studies, the impact is sustained. He thinks that "it's the
   poorest 10% [of Americans] who seem to lose out, cutting their wages
   by perhaps 5%."

   Worse, say the sceptics, migration may limit poor natives' chances of
   moving up to better-paid jobs. With changing economies that reward
   skills, it is anyway getting harder to move up the ladder from
   low-wage jobs to better-paid ones. Now migrants, especially those with
   skills and drive, are making life even harder for the weakest natives.

   A second worry is that migrants will put a strain on public services
   and the tax system. It is in schools, public housing and doctors'
   surgeries that natives come face to face with migrants and it is often
   at the local and state level, where responsibility for such services
   usually lies, that hostility to migrants seems strongest. Local
   councils in Britain complain that clinics and schools are overloaded
   and central government is slow to dish out help, and local police in
   areas with many immigrants blame foreigners for a rise in crime.

   In Greece, as new illegal immigrants arrive at remote spots on the
   border, officials complain that they lack funds for policing and
   social services. The prefect of Samos laments that "we are given a
   short bedsheet to cover our body." In America hostility to migrants is
   greatest where they have recently been arriving in large numbers, not
   where their absolute numbers are highest (near the borders or in big
   cities, such as New York). Several states have passed tough new laws
   banning illegal migrants from using their public services.

   But crowding, although likely to cause resentment, results from the
   unexpected arrival of those migrants, with bureaucracies taking time
   to allocate resources to the right places. In itself, it does not
   prove that migrants are a drag on public services as a whole. Indeed,
   migrants often make a large contribution to the public purse. When a
   foreign worker first arrives, usually as a young adult, fully educated
   and in good health, he makes few demands on schools or clinics. A
   legal immigrant will pay taxes just like any native; even an illegal
   one will contribute something (if only through the tax on those
   bottles of bison grass vodka). If the immigrant stays on (and quite a
   few do not), the benefits will diminish as he ages, but at least he
   has given his host country a breathing space.

   To complicate matters, highly skilled migrants contribute much more to
   tax and social-security systems than do less skilled ones. A study in
   America by the National Research Council suggests that migrants with
   an education beyond high school contribute an average of $105,000 to
   the tax coffers over their lifetime. By contrast, the least educated
   migrants are reckoned to leave the taxman with a $89,000 hole. But
   migrants as a whole, in the long term and counting the contribution of
   their children when they grow up and get jobs, are not a drain on
   public services. For rich countries with ageing workforces in
   particular, gains from importing the young, the energetic and those
   willing to take risks comfortably outweigh the costs.

