
   After a tumultuous year, there may be a decisive shift in British
   politics in 2008



   IN SOME parts of the world iconic statues are toppled, barricades
   erected or the bodies of autocrats strung up in piazzas. In British
   politics, "tipping points"--moments when an outbreak of sentiment
   becomes an epidemic, a trend becomes destiny and a leader's fate is
   sealed--tend to be visible only at a distance. That, of course, does
   not stop people spotting them immediately.

   In the last few months of 2007, much of the political class has
   confidently predicted the end of Labour's long imperium--though there
   is disagreement over which of the superabundant governmental
   calamities represented the decisive moment. The run on Northern Rock?
   The "bottled" non-election? The weird funding scandal (unlikely, since
   most people already assume that politicians are more crooked than they
   actually are)? Or "Discgate", about which senior Conservatives are so
   cock-a-hoop that they jokingly offered to pay for the letters sent to
   the 7m families whose details were lost in the post?

   In fact, British politics may well have tipped in 2007. But in
   hindsight it may turn out to have done so in a different, subtler,
   perhaps more important way.

   For future historians, the year's most salient event will probably be
   neither the bounce and fall of Gordon Brown, nor the summer fall and
   autumnal second coming of David Cameron, the Tory leader. It will be
   the descent of the final curtain (aeons ago, it already seems) on the
   great actor-prime minister, Tony Blair. One of Mr Blair's legacies,
   energetically embraced by Mr Cameron, is a politics of emulation, in
   which the distinction between the two big parties is more thespian and
   less ideological than it was before he commandeered the Labour Party.
   In this Mr Blair was himself responding to more fundamental shifts in
   British society: the decline of the old industrial economy, the spread
   and sharpening of aspiration, and the resulting obsolescence of
   political competition based on class interests.

   The flip side of Mr Blair's electoral success--two landslide victories
   and one limping, post-Iraq win--is the waning of traditional party
   allegiances. For Mr Brown, Mr Cameron and future Tory and Labour
   leaders, that means the old blocks of voters that their parties have
   been able to rely on (roughly a third of the country in both cases)
   are shrinking. The prejudices that once inhibited voters from
   switching directly between the main parties are evaporating too.
   Moreover, voters are not only more floaty than they once were: there
   are also fewer of them. British politicians--like those in other
   advanced democracies--face the awkward dual challenges of fickleness
   and indifference. Sceptical of the impact that mere national
   government has on their lives, growing minorities are declining to
   vote altogether (though the French election suggests that some
   contests are galvanising enough to arrest that trend); other voters
   are deserting mainstream parties for single-issue alternatives.

   The real import of the past year's political volatility may lie not in
   who is up and down at the end of it, but in the volatility itself. The
   polls, which now show the Tories sailing above 40%--closing on the
   numbers they need to win an outright majority at the next
   election--have been too erratic to foretell the outcome reliably;
   earlier in 2007 they seemed to presage a hung parliament, and then the
   final extinction of Conservatism. Instead they may suggest that the
   year of Mr Blair's exit marked the start of a new epoch of fluid,
   yo-yoing, 21st-century politics.

   So the answer to the parlour-game question, about which of Mr Brown's
   2007 mishaps was decisive, is: none of them. Still, for all the
   fluidity, that more parochial tipping point--the one that seals Mr
   Brown's fate--may come during 2008.

   Even in a newly unstable political era, there will be times when
   reputations dip too low to be recovered, or when a party's momentum
   becomes, in the short term, almost impossible to stop. Mr Brown may
   well wait as long as he can, until 2010, to go to the country; but it
   is nevertheless likely that 2008 will reveal whether his current slump
   is remediable (as slumps can be), and whether Mr Cameron's own bounce
   is to flatten (like those of other recent Tory leaders).

   An Englishman's home, a Scotsman's fate

   The impact made by Nick Clegg, the newly anointed energetic leader of
   the Liberal Democrats, will affect both men's prospects. So will three
   other, related variables. The first and most straightforward is
   geographic. To win an election, the Tories need to start doing better
   in some suburban bits of the Midlands, Yorkshire and Lancashire that
   embraced Margaret Thatcher but that Mr Cameron has so far failed to
   seduce. The worry for him is that the tactics and pledges that have
   strengthened Tory support in the south-east will flop, or even
   backfire, farther north.

   The second factor is atmospheric. At the moment many voters are
   looking resentfully at Labour's record in office through the
   refractive lens of recent debacles. Will that distaste harden into a
   settled conviction that Mr Brown's number is up? Government is in part
   the business of losing friends and disappointing people, and by the
   end of 2008 it may be clear whether Labour has simply lost and
   disappointed too many to win a fourth term. Mr Cameron, meanwhile,
   needs to allay residual fears about his callowness, and doubts about
   the personality of his party.

   The third factor, stupid, is the economy. There are a lot of crazily
   leveraged homeowners in Britain; if the economic slowdown and the
   credit crunch make their mortgages a lot tougher to service, Mr Brown
   may be tipped vertiginously towards eventual defeat. Until a few
   months ago, he could feasibly have hoped that economic troubles could
   be politically useful to him, with his undeniable experience and
   reputed competence. Not any more. The long-term prospects of all three
   parties depend on how they adapt to the new, fragmented, fickle
   politics. But in 2008, old-fashioned concerns may predominate.

