
   Vaccines may prevent an epidemic. They may also have caused this
   outbreak

   BRITONS' most searing memories of their encounter with foot-and-mouth
   disease in 2001 are of the piles of animals slaughtered to try to stop
   its spread. Such a draconian policy might have been accepted had the
   disease been controlled quickly. But its ineffectiveness--more than 6m
   cows, sheep and pigs were culled before the disease was
   eradicated--led to widespread revulsion and a government rethink.

   Just as in 2001, if an animal is thought to be infected, its herd will
   be culled and a quarantine zone set up (see map). But this time,
   unless the disease is stamped out quickly, animals nearby will also be
   vaccinated to create a "fire-break" across which it is unlikely to
   travel. Already 300,000 doses of vaccine have been ordered, so that if
   government vets decide that slaughter alone is unlikely to be
   effective, they can start vaccinating straight away.

   Humans almost never catch foot-and-mouth and it rarely kills the
   cloven-hooved beasts it affects. But animals produce less milk and
   meat, so its economic effects are severe. It is also highly
   contagious: infected livestock produce the virus that causes it in
   large quantities, and transmit it through saliva, mucus, milk, faeces
   and even droplets in their breath.

   Even so, only countries where foot-and-mouth is endemic, as in parts
   of Latin America, vaccinate all animals. One reason is cost: the
   disease is caused by a virus with seven main types and tens of
   sub-types, with a targeted vaccine needed for each strain and shots
   repeated, perhaps as often as twice a year. It is also because
   vaccinating damages exports. Places that are free from foot-and-mouth
   are unwilling to import vaccinated beasts, or fresh meat from them,
   because they may still carry the disease.

   The fear of being shut out of foreign markets led to the British
   government's disastrous foot-dragging over vaccination in 2001. But
   that same year an outbreak in the Netherlands involving 26 farms was
   brought under control in just one month by vaccinating 200,000
   animals. Though healthy, these beasts then had to be culled so that
   farmers could return to exporting without restrictions as soon as
   possible.

   Not even eternal vigilance on imports can keep a country free of
   foot-and-mouth disease: the latest outbreak was apparently caused by a
   breach of bio-security at the Pirbright laboratory complex in Surrey,
   where government researchers keep the live virus for vaccine research
   and Merial, an American animal-health company, manufactures vaccine
   for export. Human action, accidental or deliberate, seems likely to
   have been involved.

   Ironically, one reason for eschewing vaccination is that although it
   provides the best hope of dealing with outbreaks, maintaining the
   capacity to produce vaccine is itself a risky business. Many earlier
   episodes of foot-and-mouth in countries normally free from the disease
   have been caused by laboratory escapes; in 1970 a leak from
   Pirbright's isolation facilities was fortunately contained.

