
   The capital's councils have gone blue. Is London ready for a Tory
   mayor?

                                                                       AP

                                     AP

                           Boris has news for you


   NEW YORK was said to be the inspiration behind London's elected mayor,
   a job that Labour created in 1999 as part of its grand devolutionary
   programme. But although the posts may sound similar, their holders
   have little in common. Michael Bloomberg is a financial-data
   billionaire with a Harvard MBA, who runs the Big Apple like a
   business. "Red Ken" Livingstone, his opposite number in London, is
   friendly with Hugo Chávez, Venezuela's socialist president, and is
   planning a festival to mark the 50th anniversary of the Cuban
   revolution.

   London's knack of attracting eccentric candidates--probably because
   the job is much less powerful than New York's--continues. On July 16th
   Boris Johnson, a scarecrow-haired old-Etonian MP, confirmed his desire
   to run as the Conservative candidate in London's mayoral election in
   May. If, as expected, he wins the party's primary ballot in September,
   he may give David Cameron's Tories their best chance yet of toppling
   Mr Livingstone, who became London's first elected mayor in 2000 and is
   seeking a third term.

   Both men are mavericks who are blessed with the gift of the gaffe. Mr
   Johnson is famous for upsetting people everywhere from Liverpool
   (which has a "tribal grievance about the rest of society") to Papua
   New Guinea (which stages "orgies of cannibalism and chief-killing").
   For his part, Red Ken called George Bush "the greatest threat to life
   on this planet".

   Until now, Mr Livingstone's victories have been distinctly one-sided,
   not least because the Tory party has long struggled to find a
   Ken-beater. Jeffrey Archer, their first-ever mayoral candidate, pulled
   out of the 2000 race when accused of perjury and was later imprisoned.
   His replacement, Steven Norris, a little-known former minister, ran
   again in 2004 and was considering a third bid after Tory efforts to
   woo everyone from John Major, a former prime minister, to Lord
   Stevens, a one-time head of London's police, came to naught.

   With the right candidate, London ought to be ripe for the
   Conservatives' taking. Last year's elections gave them a majority on
   14 London councils, twice as many as Labour. Since 2004 they have held
   the most seats in the city-wide London Assembly. They may increase
   their lead in May by taking back votes from UKIP, a right-wing fringe
   party that did well last time.

   Mr Johnson's clownishness is not to every senior Tory's taste but his
   high profile--especially with young voters--makes his antics easier to
   swallow. He is by far the best-known Tory MP bar current and former
   party leaders, says Peter Kellner of YouGov, a pollster. And his faux
   buffoonery makes traditional right-wing positions seem more palatable.
   "I may be in trouble for saying this," he begins self-deprecatingly,
   but "supposing Tower Hamlets or parts of Bradford were to become
   governed by [Muslim] religious zealots?"

   Ahead looms a no-holds-barred contest. But the love-loathe
   relationship that Londoners have with Mr Livingstone means that the
   pool of swing voters is smaller than usual, according to Julia Clark
   of Ipsos MORI, another polling firm. She says the biggest election
   issue is Mr Livingstone's congestion charge for motorists, about which
   most voters formed a view years ago. Londoners will enjoy watching the
   candidates slug it out, but many may have made up their minds already.

