
   As the NHS turns 60, politicians fight to blow out the candles 


   NO SOONER had the new year begun than the parties grabbed scalpels and
   started scrapping for advantage in the operating theatre. In a message
   to health-service staff, Gordon Brown said this would be "the year in
   which we demonstrate beyond a doubt that the NHS is as vital for our
   next 60 years as it was for our last". Since Labour founded the health
   service in 1948--an act opposed then by the Tories--the prime
   minister's letter was pure politics. For his part, David Cameron, the
   Conservative leader, proclaimed an audacious ambition for the Tories
   "to replace Labour as the party of the NHS" in 2008.

   The intense political focus on the health service springs from
   continuing public worries about its condition. Over the past decade,
   it has generally been rated the most important issue facing Britain,
   according to Ipsos MORI, a pollster. More recently it has slipped
   behind immigration and crime, but over the past year it has usually
   come second or third.

   Even more important in the calculations of the two leaders, Labour no
   longer holds the commanding heights in health-care politics. For
   several years after winning power in 1997, Labour outscored the Tories
   by colossal margins as the party with the best policies for the NHS.
   This lead had collapsed by the time that Tony Blair stepped down as
   prime minister last summer. Beset by his own difficulties, Mr Brown is
   also in trouble. According to a recent poll by Populus, Labour is only
   narrowly ahead of the Tories as the best party for the NHS: 33% of
   respondents backed Labour, 29% preferred the Conservatives.

   The public's loss of faith in Labour is rooted in a sense of
   disappointment that too little has come of the record funding
   increases of the past decade. Although long waits for operations are a
   thing of the past and many more patients are being treated, other
   aspects of the health service are lacklustre. Cancer-survival rates
   are poor by international standards; family doctors no longer see
   patients on Saturdays; and hospital-acquired infections are
   frighteningly frequent. Fuelling public discontent, medical staff are
   astonishingly fed up, even though they have received a string of big
   pay increases.

   Mr Brown is now trying to respond to some of these concerns. A new
   five-year strategy to combat and prevent cancer was unveiled a month
   ago. The government is trying to get family doctors to extend their
   opening hours to evenings and weekends. Improving cleanliness and
   reducing hospital-acquired infections are now high in the NHS's
   objectives for the coming year.

   But Mr Brown being Mr Brown, he has also set up a longer-term review
   as a way to regain the political advantage on health that Labour had
   so carelessly squandered. Within days of becoming prime minister he
   asked Lord Darzi, a surgeon and junior health minister, to set out a
   ten-year vision for the NHS by June 2008. Conveniently, that will be
   just before the much-heralded 60th birthday on July 5th.

   Although an interim report rushed out in October was a damp squib, the
   review will serve two political purposes. First, it will enable Mr
   Brown to set out grand plans for the NHS so that he can make the most
   of the anniversary. Second, the review itself, headed by a prominent
   clinician, is designed to build bridges with medical staff, who have
   been disillusioned by Labour's itch to interfere.

   There are dangers for Mr Brown in his attempt to smarten up Labour's
   health-care looks. In his message on January 1st he held out the
   prospect of a new constitution for the health service, setting out
   "the rights and responsibilities associated with an entitlement to NHS
   care". But this got a dusty reception when it was interpreted as
   meaning a possible denial of care to patients (such as the superfat)
   who fail to do enough themselves to prevent illness.

   One reason why Mr Brown wants to enhance the preventive role of the
   NHS is that the funding bonanza ends in the spring. The prime minister
   has a fight on his hands. If his strategy to rebuild Labour's lead
   fails, it will be the Conservatives under Mr Cameron who will be
   celebrating the 60th anniversary of the NHS.

