
   A loophole comes under political attack

   LITTLE riles the British more than unfair play. Most vexing of late is
   the realisation that ever more wealthy foreigners (and quite a few
   natives to boot) are using a crafty loophole to avoid paying tax on
   foreign income and the gains from selling assets held abroad.

   In most countries residents are taxed on their worldwide income.
   Residence is assessed by objective criteria: how long someone has
   lived in the country, for instance. But in Britain foreigners may
   claim residence and citizenship yet avoid paying tax on foreign income
   and capital gains by declaring themselves "non-domiciled", asserting a
   "long-term connection" with another country.

   The issue spilled into open political battle on October 1st, when
   George Osborne, the Tory shadow chancellor, proposed a flat tax of
   £25,000 ($50,000) a year on everyone claiming the exemption. The new
   tax, he said, would fund the £3.5 billion cost of cutting the burdens
   of inheritance tax and stamp duty, a tax levied on property
   transactions. Mr Osborne's crackdown looks timely: resentment about
   the rule has been building for many months, for two reasons.

   The first is that an anachronism which once seemed to apply only to a
   few Greek shipowners or foreign oilmen is now finding wider use among
   the lawyers and bankers who keep the City of London's wheels turning.
   In 2002 about 65,000 people were non-domiciled residents. By the last
   count, in 2005, that had grown to 112,000. The Conservative Party
   thinks the figure may now be as high as 150,000.

   The second reason is that the loophole, originally meant to apply only
   to foreign income, is now used to shelter earnings that would
   otherwise be considered British. Private-equity moguls, for example,
   can arrange to hold their personal investments in British takeover
   targets through offshore trusts, thus reducing to zero what little tax
   liability other loopholes left them with.

   Mr Osborne may be optimistic in estimating that his measure would
   raise £3.5 billion (the Labour Party argues it will produce just
   £650m) but perhaps not by all that much. Bill Dodwell, head of tax
   policy at Deloitte, an accounting firm, reckons the figure is not a
   million miles from the mark. Others argue for a more nuanced approach.
   Caroline Garnham, a lawyer, says Britain could learn from Switzerland,
   where foreigners negotiate how much tax they will pay in exchange for
   the right to live there.

   Still, debating the detail of a reform is easier than pressing through
   change. One reason why Gordon Brown has done nothing over the past
   decade is his reluctance to weaken the City of London by driving away
   foreign financial talent. Yet it is remarkable that the Tories--the
   historical party of business--should take the initiative. Tory
   strategists believe that the non-domicile rule is so patently unfair
   that the electorate will turn a deaf ear to Labour's attempt to
   undermine their sums.

