
   The gap between high-flown rhetoric and painful reality on the cancer
   ward


   "IF YOU were diagnosed with kidney cancer tomorrow, after you had
   stopped crying the first thing you'd do is type `kidney cancer' into
   Google," says Nick James, an oncologist who specialises in the
   disease. "The first thing you'd discover on your computer is that
   there are new drugs that could help. The second thing is that the NHS
   won't pay for them."

   Rationing in the National Health Service is nothing new, but those
   making the hard choices used to do so behind the scenes. The internet
   has now made clear what they are passing up, and at an awkward time. A
   tidal wave of costly new drugs is about to break: around 40 will be
   licensed to treat just cancer in the next few years, says Karol
   Sikora, a cancer specialist at Imperial College London. The National
   Institute for Health and Clinical Excellence (NICE), which decides
   whether treatments are sufficiently cost-effective for the NHS, will,
   he thinks, reject most or all of them.

   Patients can understand that some drugs cost too much for the taxpayer
   to finance. What they cannot understand is being discouraged from
   paying for those drugs themselves. Yet this is becoming commonplace.
   The Department of Health has decided that a patient who pays for part
   of his treatment thereby chooses to become a private patient for all
   of it. It quotes one of the NHS's founding principles--that care is
   "free at the point of use"--to support a ban on patients topping up
   their treatment, which would mean cash changing hands.

   Some patients are refusing to take no for an answer. Halliwells, a
   Manchester law firm, is representing Colette Mills and Debbie Hirst,
   two cancer patients who are demanding the right to remain NHS patients
   while buying better medicine than the NHS provides. Both want to take
   Avastin, an expensive new anti-cancer drug that is not sanctioned by
   NICE, as well as their NHS chemotherapy. But they have not been
   allowed to pay the £4,000-a-month marginal cost of doing so. Paying
   privately for all their treatment would cost each around £10,000 a
   month.

   Savvy patients will seek out consultants willing to co-operate in
   sidestepping the ban on co-payments. One specialist, who does not want
   to be named for fear of causing trouble for his hospital's managers,
   describes how he does it. If he thinks a patient would benefit from a
   drug the NHS will not provide and the patient wants to pay, he gets a
   colleague to write a private prescription for it. While he continues
   to administer the NHS-approved treatment, the extra drug is dispensed
   by a private company and administered at home.

   Even if Ms Mills and Ms Hirst do not succeed, there will be other
   challenges. Pressure will also come from plans in the pipeline to
   allow EU citizens to seek treatment abroad, paid for by their own
   country's health-care system. These could allow patients to receive
   the full treatment they desire in a foreign hospital and be reimbursed
   by the NHS for that portion it would have provided. One private health
   insurer, Western Provident Association, is so confident that topping
   up NHS cancer care will become commonplace that it has launched a
   policy covering cancer drugs the NHS will not pay for.

   Some say that, by allowing wealth to buy health, patient top-ups
   threaten the founding principles of the NHS. That is overblown: a
   report published in 2007 by Doctors for Reform, a pressure group,
   detailed how co-payment is already commonplace, with patients paying
   or part-paying for prescriptions, hearing aids and spectacles, or to
   avoid lengthy waits for consultations or scans, among other things.
   More substantive is the charge that co-payment threatens the
   cross-subsidies inherent in a taxpayer-funded service: if the working
   well know that, should the worst happen, they can top up their NHS
   care, they will be less willing to pay high taxes to fund the best
   care for everyone.

   The controversy is bubbling up at an awkward time for the prime
   minister, Gordon Brown. He is attempting to regain political momentum
   by painting a compelling picture of the future of the NHS. A new
   constitution will set out patients' rights and responsibilities--but
   talk of responsibilities (exercising, giving up smoking and the like)
   will flop if patients think their rights are at the whim of
   health-care managers. And a pledge by Mr Brown on January 7th that new
   screening programmes will mean earlier detection of illnesses sits
   oddly alongside denying treatment for illnesses already diagnosed.

