
   Toffs and spivs are quarrelling over the sport of kings

   FEW British institutions have proved as steadfast as racing, the sport
   of kings. Whereas the Royal Navy stopped handing out rum rations in
   1970, and the younger royals have moved away from family values and
   good taste, racing still clings to its oldest traditions.

   At Royal Ascot, Britain's most famous race meeting, men entering the
   royal enclosure wear full morning dress and ladies cover their
   shoulders and midriffs. Kate Fox, a social anthropologist, calls
   racing the "last bastion of old-fashioned chivalry", where women are
   treated with courtesy and even sozzled crowds have "exceptionally good
   manners".

   Away from the track, however, the relationship between the toffs who
   run racing and the bookmakers who pay its bills has taken a turn for
   the worse. They are at each others' throats over the question of how
   much bookies should pay to keep the horses in oats. Negotiations broke
   down late last year, forcing them to ask the government to decide,
   something that happens from time to time. This year the talks have
   become uncommonly uncivil because of a new twist: half the country's
   racecourses (including some of its biggest) have backed a new
   television service, Turf TV, set up to compete with the existing one
   owned by bookmakers. Its footage of lather-necked horses racing
   towards the finish line may cost bookmakers £50m a year more.

   Wrangling between the toffs and spivs dates back to at least the
   1930s, when gamblers first started to subsidise the track. Racing has
   always been unprofitable for most of its participants, not least
   owners and trainers, who are mainly in it for love, not money. Because
   the betting industry relies on the sport for its profits, the
   government has long forced bookies to cough up to subsidise racetracks
   and the racehorse owners.

   At first it did so by allowing bookies to take bets only at the track,
   where they were charged an entrance fee five times higher than the
   public one. And since 1961, when gambling away from the course was
   legalised, it has forced betting shops to pay a levy which currently
   stands at about a tenth of their gross profits from horseracing. This
   now yields a bit less than £100m a year, according to Deloitte, an
   accounting firm--or almost a quarter of racing's total revenues and
   most of its prize money. Even so, horse owners recoup less than a
   quarter of their operating costs, far less than in France, Japan and
   America, reckons Wray Vamplew, of Stirling University. About a tenth
   of British owners and trainers drop out of the sport each year.

   The current squabble is one in a series but it signals the possibility
   of far-reaching change. The government has long wanted to get rid of
   the levy, fretting that, were the matter taken to court, the transfer
   could be deemed illegal state aid. So spivs and toffs have been
   encouraged to find a commercial arrangement that doesn't involve state
   mediation. Letting racecourses charge for their own television feeds
   is not without problems: it introduces uncertainty and less popular
   racecourses may fail. Yet allowing the market to decide the sport's
   worth is a punt racecourses may have to take.

