
   The Treasury may be overdoing the crackdown

   FOR years, as chancellor of the exchequer, Gordon Brown dithered over
   what to do about rich foreigners living in Britain untaxed on their
   offshore wealth. Spurred by a Tory plan to clobber them, Alistair
   Darling, who now runs the Treasury, acted in October. His tax changes
   will bring in £650m ($1.3 billion) a year, far less than the
   Conservatives were hoping to raise. Even so they are arousing alarm,
   which a new consultation paper from the Treasury has done nothing to
   dispel.

   Some of the consternation is the usual bleating that arises when
   people have to pay more tax. But there is a genuine worry about damage
   to the economy. This risk is the main reason that the government has
   dragged its feet for so long over reform, as it has wrestled with a
   trade-off between tax equity and economic harm.

   Unlike other taxpayers, rich foreigners living in Britain can shelter
   their offshore wealth from tax. They do so by claiming "non-domiciled"
   status, asserting a longstanding connection with another country. This
   allows non-doms to avoid being taxed on overseas earnings and capital
   gains on assets held offshore, unless they remit income and gains to
   Britain. Their favoured status offends against a cardinal principle of
   tax equity: that taxpayers who have the same income (from wherever it
   is derived) should pay the same tax.

   On the other hand, as the Treasury paper lays out, non-doms, who
   include shipping tycoons and City high-fliers, pack an economic punch
   much weightier than their number, currently around 115,000. Their
   average earnings in Britain, on which they do pay tax, exceed
   £100,000. As a result, they contributed taxable income of £12 billion
   to the economy in 2005-06 and paid income tax worth £4 billion.

   The danger in imposing a draconian tax regime on non-doms is that many
   of them may pack their bags and go elsewhere. That could harm the
   economy and lead to a loss in domestic tax revenues. Aware of the
   risk, Mr Darling is sweetening the tax pill. From next April, non-doms
   will face an annual levy of £30,000 to retain their status. This will
   apply only to those who have been in Britain for more than seven out
   of the past ten years, however.

   The period of grace slashes the number likely to be affected, to
   around 20,000. Of these, the Treasury says that only 4,000 will find
   it worthwhile to pay the levy; 3,000 will leave Britain, and the rest
   will give up their non-dom status, so that they are taxed on their
   foreign income and capital gains like ordinary Brits.

   On the face of it this looks like a reasonable deal, and a more
   sensible approach than the Tory plan, under which all non-doms would
   pay a £25,000 levy in order to retain their tax status. The Treasury
   estimates that this plan would bring in an extra £300m a year but
   prompt a further 13,000 non-doms to flee the country. It would also
   deter new temporary foreign workers from coming to Britain.

   But what is jarring nerves is that the Treasury also appears to be
   cracking down on the offshore trusts where non-doms hold much of their
   wealth. As yet the details are unclear, but there are mounting worries
   about the direction of travel. "The fear is that Britain's tax regime
   is becoming unfriendlier and more intrusive for mobile foreigners,"
   says John Whiting, a tax partner at PricewaterhouseCoopers, an
   accountancy firm.

   The government is not wrong to tighten taxation of non-doms, but it
   needs to tread carefully. After leaving them alone, arguably for too
   long, it needs to temper their tax privileges cautiously. The economy
   needs to keep attracting footloose, smart, rich foreign workers in
   order to thrive.

