
   Leftist rhetoric distracts from a move towards the centre

   THE Liberal Democrats, often neglected by the media, got their own
   back at their annual conference in Brighton this week. Journalists
   decamping to the coastal town were looking forward to some of the
   internal strife that has made Britain's third party an intermittently
   rewarding beat in recent years: a leadership putsch, for example, or a
   showdown between the different strands of liberalism that sometimes
   make the party hard to handle. They had, instead, to get their heads
   around some serious bits of policy-making.

   To be sure, there are grumbles about Sir Menzies Campbell, the party
   leader, who is prone to presentational gaffes and seems older than his
   66 years. But there is little desire for a contest only 18 months
   after he replaced Charles Kennedy. Delegates also play down the
   ideological fault-line between the "Orange Bookers", a group of mostly
   young MPs who are authors of a tome espousing economic as well as
   social liberalism, and more conventionally left-wing elements of the
   party. All political parties, they note, are uneasy coalitions.

   And yet a divide of sorts did emerge in Brighton: that between the
   party's rhetoric, which is flirting heavily with the populist left,
   and its policies, most of which are assiduously centrist. On September
   16th Sir Menzies lambasted the rich for having done "too well" under
   Labour. The following day Vince Cable, the party's Treasury spokesman,
   deplored Britain's generous tax treatment of internationally mobile
   wealth, labelling Gordon Brown the "patron saint of the super-rich".
   After that Mr Kennedy reminded delegates that, when the party went
   into the last election promising to raise the top rate of income tax,
   it won its largest number of parliamentary seats for 80 years.

   Such language is not without a tactical rationale: polls show that
   most Britons, including Tory voters, believe that the richest should
   pay more tax. And it may be the only way of retaining left-wing voters
   who defected to the party from Labour over the Iraq war at the last
   election.

   But it also disguises the real drift of party policy, which is towards
   the middle ground. Having proposed an extra penny on the basic rate of
   income tax under Mr Kennedy, the Liberal Democrats now plan a
   four-pence cut. This would be offset by tax hikes elsewhere,
   especially on those who pollute: under Chris Huhne, their environment
   spokesman, the Lib Dems have become the first of the big parties to
   aim for a zero-carbon Britain. But the party's stomach for imposing
   heavier direct taxes on large sections of the electorate has gone.

   Its line on public services--long criticised as mere demands for
   higher spending, and uncosted ones at that--is also starting to
   embrace market reforms. Norman Lamb, the party's health spokesman,
   wants to put more NHS funding into the hands of patients: pregnant
   women, for example, should be able to purchase care from independent
   midwives. David Laws, who holds the schools brief, insists that just
   pouring more money into the system won't help Britain's failing
   pupils.

   Even on civil liberties, the issue which (along with the environment)
   most animates Liberal Democrats, there is a gap between rhetoric and
   policy. The conference's opening rally saw Sir Menzies share a
   platform with Shami Chakrabarti, head of a campaign group named
   Liberty, who used the opportunity to call Lord Carlile, the Lib Dem
   peer who reviews anti-terrorism laws for the government, a "public
   champion for internment". The party's policy in this area is rather
   more pragmatic. Nick Clegg, the home-affairs spokesman, balances his
   opposition to extending detention without trial with ideas to bring
   suspects to court more quickly, and proposes a qualified rather than
   an absolute amnesty for illegal immigrants.

   Some Orange Bookers admit that the left-wing tone various leading Lib
   Dems struck this week may have distracted attention from the serious
   work on policy. Not an incendiary revelation, but perhaps the closest
   journalists will get to an internal rift in the party anytime soon.

