
   The government wants to build up a marine-energy industry

   THE British have always looked to the sea to protect them from the
   earth's dangers. The ocean is a handy deterrent to foreign armies, but
   it is useful for other things too. In the midst of the energy crisis
   of the 1970s, there was much talk that marine energy would let its
   possessors break free of OPEC. With the arrival of North Sea oil,
   marine energy was forgotten. But 35 years later, with North Sea oil in
   decline, climate change a big issue and wind farms facing lengthy
   planning delays, sea power is back on the agenda.

   On September 17th the government announced that planning permission
   had been given for Wave Hub, a £28m project off the north Cornish
   coast that will provide a sea-floor "socket" allowing wave-power
   generators to get their electricity back to shore. The South West
   Regional Development Agency (SWRDA), a quango which will part-fund the
   project, has high hopes. Four firms are planning to connect their
   machines, forming what officials hope will be the world's biggest wave
   farm, with 30 machines supplying up to 20 megawatts of power. An
   existing wave-power project in the Orkney islands is set to expand,
   and officials are studying a multi-billion-pound private-sector plan
   to harness the tides near the mouth of the river Severn.

   Marine energy, and especially wave power, is still an immature
   technology. Many designs concentrate on surviving the fury of ocean
   storms rather than maximising energy production. Nor is it cheap.
   Firms are coy about giving precise figures but the Carbon Trust, a
   government-funded green consultancy, reckoned the price a year ago was
   between 22p and 25p per kilowatt hour--around nine times the price of
   gas-fired electricity.

   Boosters argue that technology and mass production will bring costs
   down. British officials seem to agree. Having noticed the success of
   the Danes in developing their wind-turbine industry, both the SWRDA
   and the Scottish Executive want to do the same for ocean power.

   Geography is one advantage: rough seas and big tides make the British
   isles one of the best places in the world for sea power. The Carbon
   Trust believes that, in theory, sea power could provide 20% of the
   country's electricity. There is engineering expertise, notably in
   Aberdeen, where the offshore oil industry has been installing complex
   machinery in rough seas for decades. The International Energy Agency
   thinks that Britain is pursuing more marine-power designs (29) than
   any other country (America, with 13, is second). Scotland already
   boasts the European Marine Energy Centre, a research outfit, an
   advantage the West Country hopes to counteract by spending £15m on a
   similar organisation attached to the universities of Exeter and
   Plymouth.

   The economics are more complicated. David Weaver, the chief executive
   of Oceanlinx, one of the firms planning to use the Wave Hub, argues
   that Britain's liberalised and transparent power markets make life
   easier for newcomers, although others argue that fluctuating power
   prices make planning tricky. Subsidies are more generous in countries
   such as Portugal, which is keen on building a marine-power sector of
   its own and offers extra cash to less mature technologies.

   Not everyone is enthusiastic. When the Wave Hub was announced, Cornish
   surfers worried that it might make their tubes less gnarly. Others are
   more concerned about the price. Mr Edge reckons that the Danes spent
   around £1 billion creating their wind-turbine industry. Setting up a
   British marine-power sector will cost a similar amount, he says--a big
   jump from the £28m Wave Hub.

