
   The super-casino gamble failed. What next?

   BLACKPOOL'S seafront is not the most tempting destination for a winter
   break. But the chill has not deterred one elderly couple, who have
   been coming once a fortnight from nearby Rochdale for more decades
   than they can remember. "It's the best place in England, this," they
   say. "But it could do with a lick of paint."

   Last week Blackpool narrowly missed out on a facelift worth £450m when
   it lost its bid to host Britain's first super-casino. An advisory
   panel chose nearby Manchester for the dubious honour instead. It
   surprised everyone, including the television crews who were waiting in
   Blackpool to film the joyous reaction that wasn't to be.

   "We feel mugged," says David Helliwell, the editor of the local
   Gazette. His staff are sifting through more than 2,000 letters from
   readers to pass on to Tessa Jowell, the culture secretary who endorsed
   the panel's decision, demanding that the recommendation be reversed.
   The area's four MPs are due to meet her soon too, though few expect
   her to change her mind. Nor is it likely that Parliament will overturn
   the decision.

   Most Britons are lukewarm about the super-casino, but in Blackpool it
   was seen as a lifeline. Less than two decades ago the Victorian
   working-class playground drew as many as 17m visitors a year, but
   these days it struggles to stay above 10m. Cheap package holidays to
   warmer climes sucked away many families in the 1980s, and big northern
   cities such as Leeds and Newcastle cornered the "weekend-break" market
   in the 1990s.

   Fewer tourists have meant fewer jobs. Between 1994 and 2005 the number
   of registered businesses in Blackpool slipped by 6%, though businesses
   across the country increased by 15%. Most of the victims were small
   guesthouses. Unemployment now stands at 7% and wages have sagged. In
   2002 the average Blackpudlian was paid 17% less than the average
   Briton; by 2006 the gap was 23%.

   Despite the dwindling numbers of visitors, Blackpool's infrastructure
   seems to have locked it into continuing dependence on tourism. Whole
   streets are given over to guesthouses (with 70,000 beds, Blackpool
   equals Madrid in capacity) and there is little space for new building
   (after Portsmouth, the borough is the most densely developed outside
   London). This is partly what makes the casino decision such a sore
   point, says Alan Cavill, head of development on Blackpool's council.
   Leisure tourism is the town's one strong suit--why give a big leisure
   attraction to a city such as Manchester that has many other options?

   Locals can take some cheer from a big lump of money that is going into
   developing Blackpool's surroundings. The seafront will be remodelled
   with £75m of government cash, plus £8m from the regional development
   agency to dress it up. With luck (and Blackpool is due some), a
   further £24m of lottery funding will provide the beach with a gaudy
   artistic show, which Mr Cavill promises will continue Blackpool's
   tradition of "challenging the boundaries of good taste". The seafront
   tramway is also due to be revamped.

   These projects should go some way towards providing the missing lick
   of paint. What remains to be found is a big chunk of private
   investment to get people into the town in the first place. A casino
   alternative remains elusive, but possible candidates include an indoor
   rainforest, a covered ski slope and a new branch of Legoland, a Danish
   theme-park chain.

   Whatever projects come to fruition, Blackpool landladies--legendarily
   tough--are finding ways to manage the decline. Pat Stokes, who runs
   the Mar-Ray guesthouse on Springfield Road, keeps her nine bedrooms
   full, thanks to her two new [3]websites. She is not bothered about the
   casino, she says; most of her customers are regulars. The traditional
   arcades are also wising up. Warwick Tunnicliffe, whose family has been
   in the amusements business since 1881, saw the writing on the wall in
   the 1980s and upped sticks from the touristy seafront to the town
   centre. Now, he reckons, 95% of the money in his slot machines comes
   from locals, sheltering him from seasonal ups and downs.

   New types of visitors are also helping to buoy Blackpool's economy.
   Along the promenade, bars and strip-clubs illustrate the rise of the
   lucrative stag- and hen-night market. Gay tourists have also proved a
   hit, as the rainbow flags running down Lord Street testify. Yet
   tradition endures: come lunchtime, Burger King, Bella Pasta and other
   modern pretenders are quiet. Everyone is in Harry Ramsden's, eating
   fish and chips.

