


   Gordon Brown risks provoking two dangers that he is trying to avert

   [3]Gordon Brown

   IN DOSTOYEVSKY'S novel "The Idiot", the hero--part savant, part
   blundering naïf--arrives at an important party with only one goal in
   mind: not to break the hostess's valuable Chinese vase. He wants to
   keep his distance, but ends up smashing it. The episode is a nice
   parable of anxiety-management; it shows how trying too hard to avert a
   danger can instead make it happen.

   Gordon Brown is himself part deep-thinking ascetic, part inadvertent
   blunderer, and he risks making the same mistake, in more than one way.
   A wrong-headed overkill--one that may help to induce the outcome that
   is most feared--is evident in his controversial plan to increase from
   28 days the time suspected terrorists can be held without charge.
   Behind that lies another counterproductive anxiety, one which is
   hobbling Mr Brown's broader mission: his yearning to keep Labour in
   office beyond the roughly 28 more months that, by coincidence, are the
   maximum its current mandate allows.

   In fact his best hope of sticking around for longer is simple: to stop
   worrying about the electoral vase in the corner, give up his
   underwhelming party tricks and concentrate on the far-sighted
   governing that, beneath the mishaps, he is capable of delivering.

   The days are numbered

   Mr Brown sensibly compares the Islamist threat that Britain now faces
   to the cold war, describing it as a generational struggle that must be
   waged in classrooms, libraries and prisons, as well as with bullets.
   But this grown-up realism has been lost in the furore over pre-charge
   detention, which has again become a totemic but needless test of the
   government's strength.

   The prime minister and Jacqui Smith, his embattled home secretary, now
   want to give the police the temporary power to hold terrorism suspects
   for up to 42 days before charging them. That is a humbler goal than
   the push for a 90-day maximum that in 2005 brought Tony Blair his
   first defeat in the House of Commons, after which the current limit
   was set. The latest figure splits the difference (never an encouraging
   sign) with the one of 56 that has been floated since Mr Brown became
   prime minister. The new power would be overseen by judges and MPs, and
   would avowedly be invoked only in exceptional circumstances. Unlike
   his predecessor, Mr Brown seems genuinely attached to the concept of
   liberty, but thinks these provisos make his scheme compatible with
   that principle.

   Unfortunately, they don't. For example, the parliamentary scrutiny
   that forms the main extra safeguard--MPs would get a vote on whether
   the home secretary is right temporarily to stretch the detention
   limit--would sometimes be exercised only after the suspect had been
   banged up for the extra weeks. Since it would make their job easier,
   the police are keen on the move; but most other legal and security
   bigwigs doubt that the extension is justified. The government itself
   accepts that no circumstances have yet arisen in which more than 28
   days have been required, but says such cases may happen in the
   future--an open-ended rationale that might be used to advocate more or
   less anything (torture, say, or maybe the odd covert assassination).

   So anyone who thinks Britain may be quietly sliding towards a state of
   permanent emergency should worry (again). But even fervent
   utilitarians should pay attention, for two reasons. First, although
   the evidence backing the need for change is scant, there is plenty of
   proof that insensitive policing and draconian laws risk alienating,
   and perhaps radicalising, British Muslims: an unintended outcome much
   more catastrophic than the Idiot's broken ornament. Second, this itch
   to push beyond 28 days epitomises what has been the key failing and
   frustration of Mr Brown's bid to survive beyond 28 months: a tendency
   to obscure his own merits, and damage his own prospects, by myopically
   pursuing short-term advantage.

   Governments are naturally inclined to insulate themselves from the
   charge that they have been lax with the public's safety; many security
   initiatives have an obvious political edge. In the case of Labour's
   anti-terrorism laws, however, the edge has been especially sharp. Mr
   Brown insists that the Conservatives' opposition to his new policy is
   opportunistic. Since some Tory MPs privately agree with the
   government, his indignation is right as well as righteous. But the way
   the latest plans have been rushed out--before some inquiries designed
   to inform them are complete--casts doubt on his motives too. At least
   one of them may be a pressing desire to make a tabloid-friendly
   splash, to dispel the lacklustre impression created by the calamities
   of the past few weeks. The prospect of succeeding in Parliament where
   Mr Blair failed may also be a lure.

   Those unofficial explanations reflect the motives that have troubled
   Mr Brown's short premiership. These arose from the circumstances and
   timing of his succession. Mr Brown needed to distinguish himself from
   his predecessor, impress a jaundiced electorate and do it in hurry--or
   face being seen as a fag-end failure. But his clumsily urgent efforts
   to obviate that possibility, most obviously in the self-inflicted
   humiliation of the non-election, have instead made it more likely.
   Given the chance to expound on them, he has statesmanlike things to
   say about international affairs and thoughtful ones about the
   constitution. But just as his sensible thinking on terrorism has been
   overshadowed, so far his best ideas have scarcely got a hearing.

   Even if his worst electoral fears are realised, Mr Brown could make
   useful contributions in these fields, and others such as energy
   security, in the next 28 months. But if he can stick to the long
   perspective he can still avoid the Idiot's self-inflicted fate.
   Elections, after all, are more unsentimental referendums on the future
   than they are judgments on the past. Giving up the obsession with
   going beyond 28 days would be a good way for Mr Brown to signal a new,
   patient approach. Can he?

