
   Offshore technology: Rising costs and clever kit are transforming the
   oil platform--and could even do away with it altogether 

   FROM the helipad on top of the Alwyn North oil and gas platform, the
   horizon looks crowded. The massive structure stands in the middle of
   the North Sea, miles from land, but it is far from isolated. Another
   20-odd platforms are visible, plus several drilling rigs, not to
   mention all the ships and helicopters carting staff and supplies
   around. Waters that look featureless and deserted on the map turn out
   to be littered with teeming settlements.

                                                                    Alamy

                                   Alamy

                           An endangered species?

   All this activity comes at tremendous cost. Total, the oil giant that
   owns Alwyn North, spent £1.5 billion ($2.4 billion) to build it back
   in the mid-1980s. It has since spent around £700m on improvements, and
   plans to spend £150m more. And Alwyn North is just one of 435
   platforms in the British portion of the North Sea.

   Then there are running costs. Up to 300 people live on the platform at
   a time, but keeping it fully manned involves more than twice that
   figure, since most staff get three weeks off for every two that they
   work. Simply flying them all from Aberdeen to the platform costs about
   £1,000 per person per trip. (Aberdeen boasts the world's busiest
   civilian heliport, thanks to all the offshore traffic.) Food and other
   supplies are brought in by boat. Another vessel is kept on standby
   near the platform all the time, in case of emergency. Generators and
   desalinators run around the clock to provide power and drinking water.

   According to Oil and Gas UK, an industry group, oil firms spent over
   £11 billion last year building and running offshore facilities in
   British waters. That puts production costs, at $22 per barrel, among
   the highest in the world. And they are rising rapidly. Deutsche Bank
   estimates that inflation in the oil business has run at 30% a year
   over the past two years, and will continue to rise by at least 15% a
   year this year and next.

   No wonder, then, that firms are determined to reduce the expense of
   producing oil at sea, in the North Sea and elsewhere. One of the
   simplest ways to cut costs is to minimise the number of people working
   on platforms and increase their productivity with the help of modern
   communications. Alwyn North is connected to the mainland by
   fibre-optic cable. That allows geologists onshore to analyse data from
   drilling as it occurs, suggest adjustments and design future drilling
   plans without ever leaving their offices. It also provides continuity
   between shifts: Jon Starkebye of IBM, a computer giant that provides
   services to oil companies, notes that a platform's output can fall by
   as much as 7% during hand-overs between different teams.

   With access to more powerful computers onshore, firms can crunch more
   numbers and so model more accurately what is going on in their fields.
   That allows them to anticipate and pre-empt the intrusion of water
   into their wells, say, or the failure of equipment. Such techniques
   have enabled Statoil, a Norwegian oil firm, to stretch out the period
   between shutdowns for repairs at one field from 750 hours to 4,000,
   and to reduce the annual hours of engineering work at another from
   20,000 to 6,000.

   These efficiencies, in turn, permit much smaller crews: whereas a
   typical older platform needed 100 workers, new ones can make do with
   as few as 29, says Adolfo Henriquez, who is in charge of disseminating
   such "integrated operations" through the firm. Adopting similar
   techniques at all of Norway's offshore fields would yield an extra 250
   billion Norwegian kroner ($43.6 billion) in revenues, according to a
   study published last year by the local oil-industry association.

   Another way for firms operating offshore to economise is by developing
   multiple fields from a single platform. Oil platforms used to stand
   directly above the fields they drilled, as Alwyn North does over the
   oil and gas deposits of the same name. But Total has since discovered
   several other pockets of hydrocarbons nearby. The closest ones can be
   tapped from the platform, since it is now possible to drill sideways
   as well as up and down: a total of 20 wells snake out from Alwyn North
   in different directions. Earlier this year, Exxon Mobil broke the
   record for this sort of long-distance drilling with a well over 11km
   (7 miles) long.

   Even more distant fields can be "tied back" to a platform using
   pipelines along the sea floor. In a tie-back, the valves that open and
   close the well are located not on the rig, but on the sea floor;
   engineers operate them by remote control. Several deposits of oil and
   gas, including Nuggets, a cluster of gas fields over 40km away, are
   linked to Alwyn North in this way. Next, Total plans to connect a new
   discovery called Jura to the platform. As a result the lifespan of
   Alwyn North, estimated at 10 years when it first started production in
   1987, has been extended to over 40 years, while its projected output
   has almost quadrupled.

   The next logical step is to put more equipment underwater, in the hope
   of dispensing with platforms altogether. Statoil, for example, is
   tapping a gas field called Snohvit, which lies 143km offshore, without
   using a platform. But this is possible only because the pressure of
   the field is strong enough to keep the gas flowing through the long
   pipeline back to shore. Norsk Hydro, another Norwegian energy firm on
   the verge of merging with Statoil, has developed another gas field,
   Ormen Lange, in the same way. But in a few years a compressor that can
   work underwater will be needed to supplement the falling pressure in
   the field. Last year, Norsk Hydro hired General Electric (GE), an
   American industrial giant, to build a prototype. "Fifteen years from
   now," says Claudi Santiago of GE, "the vision is that offshore
   platforms will disappear."

   Or maybe not. If some way can be found to liquefy gas offshore, Mr
   Santiago points out, then deposits that are currently too remote for
   the construction of pipelines could be developed, and the gas
   transported in liquid form by ship instead. That would give offshore
   platforms a whole new lease on life.

