
   Healing those who harm themselves


   IT IS unpleasant to reflect that we will all perish one day--and even
   worse to suspect that the health service meant to look after us may
   have a hand in our demise. But that is what many Britons fear.
   Outbreaks of hospital-acquired infections such as MRSA and C.
   difficile, and stories of women in labour without a midwife and old
   folk unwashed and unfed, make admission to hospital seem like a game
   of Russian roulette. Meanwhile, rulings by the National Institute for
   Health and Clinical Excellence, which has the power to decide which
   medical treatments offer sufficiently good value that they should be
   paid for by the NHS, guarantee a stream of headlines about how ailing
   Britons are denied treatments that are standard abroad.

   Challenging this perception that the NHS is likely to fail voters in
   their hour of need was, presumably, the reason why the prime minister,
   Gordon Brown, joined the health secretary, Alan Johnson, for the
   announcement on December 3rd of a new national cancer strategy. This
   committed an extra £370m over the next five years to spotting cancers
   earlier and ensuring better treatment for those who develop the
   disease. More radiotherapy equipment and staff will account for £200m;
   and breast, cervical and bowel screening programmes will be expanded.

   The main thrust of the plan, though, was to improve prevention rather
   than cure. Over half of all cancers could be prevented by changes to
   lifestyle, it says. Cigarette-vending machines and coin-operated
   sunbeds face curbs in an attempt to make it harder for youngsters to
   smoke or fry themselves to a melanoma-inducing crisp. And from 2008
   schoolgirls will be vaccinated against HPV, a virus implicated in 70%
   of cases of cervical cancer.

   Smoking, drinking and obesity are the big culprits; all are hard to
   change, but the government will keep on trying. More graphic warnings
   on cigarette packets, and an advertising campaign to teach people how
   to keep track of the amount they drink, may have a positive, if
   limited, impact on the first two. But a "cross-government strategy to
   tackle obesity", to be published "shortly", looks like an admission
   that no one knows how to tackle the third.

   Behind all this activity is a nagging feeling that Britain is not
   getting good value for the money it has put into cancer care. By
   international standards, mortality rates from the disease are middling
   (see chart), although the high numbers of British women who smoked in
   the 1980s and 1990s pushed up the incidence of lung cancer.
   Improvements in survival rates only show up many years later, of
   course. But the most recent figures, which indicate how many of those
   whose cancers were diagnosed before 2002 were alive five years later,
   suggest that Britons fare worse overall than most other Europeans.
   Survival rates were highest in the Nordic countries (except Denmark)
   and lower than average in Britain. In general, countries that spent
   more fared better; but Britain had lower survival rates than other
   countries with similar expenditure.

   Just two days after the new cancer strategy was unveiled, another
   national plan, this time for preventing and dealing with strokes,
   joined it. (Mr Johnson was allowed to handle this one without his boss
   by his side; not for nothing is stroke known as the silent killer.)
   The plan offers brave words about preventing 20,000 strokes a year by
   promoting healthy living and prescribing statins more widely. And
   those patients who have minor strokes are to be guaranteed an MRI scan
   within a week (only 35% of centres manage this at present), or within
   a day if they are at high risk of suffering a full-blown stroke. The
   Department of Health reckons this could reduce by four-fifths the
   number of people who go on to have a more serious stroke.

   Sandwiched between the two plans was a worrying report on maternal
   mortality, which is still low in Britain, but is rising. The report
   from the confidential inquiry into maternal deaths condemned poor
   standards of care, but also found that, of 295 women who died while
   giving birth between 2003 and 2005, half were overweight and 15% were
   very obese. Another reminder that, whereas patients hope the NHS will
   look after them, the NHS needs them to look after themselves.

