
   Why the government keeps on losing records

   FOR many years Britain's tiny band of civil libertarians have been
   trying to alert their countrymen to the danger of proliferating
   government databases, which allow bureaucrats to share citizens'
   information among themselves with the minimum of fuss. A string of
   recent blunders have made their case more powerfully than years of
   lobbying. The latest to emerge has been the loss earlier this year of
   3m driving-test records held at a data centre in Iowa.

   That unwelcome disclosure was made on December 17th, just after
   Alistair Darling, the chancellor of the exchequer, had published a
   preliminary report into a much bigger mistake. A month earlier, in a
   charged parliamentary session, a shaken Mr Darling revealed that the
   Treasury's tax agency, HMRC, had managed to lose two CDs containing
   the records of 25m child-benefit claimants in the post. The
   information included names, dates of birth and bank-account
   details--everything an identity thief needs--and is reckoned to be the
   world's second-biggest data blunder.

   Mr Darling portrayed the loss as an unfortunate lapse by a junior
   official that breached security guidelines. But in the weeks since the
   revelation that has become a harder line to sell. After the loss of
   the discs HMRC sent out a letter of apology to everyone affected. But
   in its haste the tax authority made another mistake: the letters, many
   of which will have missed their intended recipients, contained much
   more personal information than was necessary to apologise. Tax
   officials have admitted that data have disappeared from their offices
   on eight occasions since 2005. A separate internal review of HMRC,
   also published on December 17th, made what amounts to scathing
   criticisms of the agency's management, albeit couched in bland
   official-speak.

   Other government departments have had their embarrassments, too. A
   technical glitch allowed online visa applicants to see their fellow
   applicants' details; a similar error allowed job-seeking junior
   doctors to read their rivals' applications as well as their own. The
   catalogue of mishaps has spurred ministers to promise reforms,
   including compulsory encryption, simpler management at HMRC and
   tougher penalties for those who break the law in the most egregious
   ways.

   Tougher sanctions may help, but much of the battle will be cultural.
   Richard Thomas, the information commissioner, told a parliamentary
   committee earlier in December that the weight of bad publicity was at
   last having an effect, and that data rules were starting to be
   followed more scrupulously. Not everyone agrees. "Not many people, and
   not many organisations, take data protection fabulously seriously,"
   says James Mitchell, a data-protection lawyer. Part of the reason, he
   says, is weak penalties under British laws.

   Others see a more fundamental problem. The Foundation for Information
   Policy Research points out that data losses are an inevitable
   consequence of the government's determination to build massive
   databases to keep tabs on its citizens. And despite the embarrassments
   of the past few weeks, it shows no sign of abandoning the biggest
   project of all: its plan to introduce identity cards for everyone.

