
   Stewart Brand, a pioneer of both environmentalism and online
   communities, has not lost his willingness to rock the boat


   IN SOME respects Stewart Brand's green credentials are impeccable. His
   mentor was Paul Ehrlich, an environmental thinker at Stanford
   university and author of "The Population Bomb", published in 1968.
   That book, and the related Club of Rome movement of the 1970s,
   famously predicted that overpopulation would soon result in the world
   running out of food, oil and other resources. Though it proved
   spectacularly wrong, its warning served as a clarion call for the
   modern environmental movement.

   Mr Brand made his name with a publication of his own, which also
   appeared in 1968, called "The Whole Earth Catalogue". It was a
   path-breaking manual crammed with examples of small-scale technologies
   to enable individuals to reduce their environmental impact, and is
   best known for its cover, which featured a picture of the Earth from
   space (which Mr Brand helped to persuade America's space agency, NASA,
   to release). The book became a bestseller in anti-corporate and
   environmental circles. In 1985 Mr Brand co-founded the WELL, a
   pioneering online community that was a precursor of today's
   social-networking websites such as MySpace and Facebook.

   Mr Brand still has a following among the Birkenstock set, and even
   lives on a tugboat near San Francisco. But meet him in person and it
   becomes clear he is not exactly your typical crunchy-granola green.
   Sitting down to lunch at a posh beach resort on Coronado Island, off
   San Diego, he does not order a vegan special but a hearty Angus burger
   with bacon, cheese and French fries, and a side-order of lobster
   bisque. "I'm genetically a contrarian," he says with a broad smile.

   Three unpopular ideas

   That is pretty evident from his recent proclamations. Rather than
   basking in past glories or sailing off to a quiet retirement, the
   68-year-old counter-cultural icon remains determined to rock the boat.
   But this time his target is the environmental movement itself. He has
   come up with a series of what he calls "environmental heresies", which
   he hopes will influence a new generation of pragmatic, problem-solving
   greens. Three things that most greens vehemently oppose--genetic
   engineering, urbanisation and nuclear power--should, he believes, be
   embraced on environmental grounds.

   Start with genetic engineering. Many greens object to the idea,
   fearing a deluge of "Frankenfoods" and the contamination of pristine
   wild species. But Mr Brand points to the work of Norman Borlaug, the
   Nobel prize-winner who proved the Club of Rome (and Mr Brand) wrong
   with his "green revolution" in agricultural productivity. Mr Brand now
   sees great promise in using genetic science to feed the world, and
   perhaps prevent future wars, by making crops that are more
   disease-resistant, drought-tolerant and produce higher yields.

   Similarly, he argues that urbanisation can be good for the
   environment. Mankind has now become a primarily urban species for the
   first time in its history, and every serious forecast predicts a surge
   in the size and number of megacities. Most environmentalists are
   dismayed at this trend, and worry about the implications of
   urbanisation for air pollution, resource consumption and so on. But Mr
   Brand bluntly rebuts them, insisting that megacities "will increase
   the Earth's carrying capacity for humans".

   That may seem an odd argument from a man who wrote a guide to natural
   living and going "off grid", but it reflects another aspect of the
   maturation of his views. Cities are good for the planet, he argues,
   because they are engines of wealth creation, and greater prosperity
   makes promoting greenery easier. When poor people move from bleak
   subsistence farming to the economic opportunities found in urban
   slums, he insists, they no longer need to chop down endangered trees
   or eat bush meat. "Nature grows back," says Mr Brand. He also believes
   cities unleash innovation--pointing to the use of mobile phones in
   slums to send money--and reckons the next big trend will come "not
   from Japanese schoolgirls, but slum-dwellers in Africa".

   Mr Brand's critics accuse him of romanticising the potential of
   megacities. But his support for the revival of nuclear power is even
   more controversial. For years, he held the orthodox environmental view
   that nukes were evil. He now confesses that this was merely "knee-jerk
   opposition", and not a carefully considered opinion. His growing
   concern about global warming, which he calls "the single most
   important environmental threat facing mankind", explains his U-turn in
   favour of this low-carbon but hugely controversial source of
   electricity.

   The turning point came, he says, when he visited Yucca Mountain, a
   remote site in the Nevada desert where American officials plan to bury
   the country's nuclear waste. He was visiting the site as part of his
   Long Now project, which aims to build a "clock" that will last 10,000
   years or more in the hope of encouraging society to think about very
   long-term issues. While studying the deep hole in the ground at Yucca
   for tips on building his clock--the site, like the clock, is being
   designed to survive unscathed for thousands of years--he had an
   epiphany.

   Although greens and other anti-nuclear activists oppose the Yucca
   Mountain project, Mr Brand says he realised that "we are asking the
   wrong question" about nuclear power. Rather than asking how spent
   nuclear fuel can be kept safe for 10,000 to 100,000 years, he says, we
   should worry about keeping it safe for only 100 years. Because nuclear
   waste still contains an enormous amount of energy, future generations
   may be able to harness it as an energy source through tomorrow's
   better technologies.

   His embrace of nuclear power was another surprising about-face, and
   plenty of energy experts, including some of his close friends,
   disagree with him. One of them is Amory Lovins, the head of the Rocky
   Mountain Institute, a natural-resources consultancy. Mr Brand recalls
   attending Mr Lovins's wedding many years ago in an American Indian
   sweat tent, where Mr Lovins and his (now ex) wife Hunter exchanged
   hunting knives in a traditional ceremony. Mr Lovins argues that the
   economics of big nuclear power plants make no sense, and that the
   future belongs to energy efficiency and small-scale, distributed
   "micropower" plants based on renewable energy sources.

                                                  [spacer.gif] [gray.gif]
                                                             [spacer.gif]
     "Environmental change changes everything, including environmentalism
                                                                 itself."
                                                             [spacer.gif]
                                                               [gray.gif]

   That friendly debate points to some awkward aspects of Mr Brand's
   self-styled environmental heresy. For one thing, the decentralised
   approach to power generation advocated by Mr Lovins seems more in tune
   with the do-it-yourself ethos of "The Whole Earth Catalogue" than the
   big nuclear power plants now championed by Mr Brand. And Mr Brand's
   argument for taking a more short-term view of nuclear safety seems to
   fly directly in the face of his Long Now project, which is intended to
   promote a more long-term perspective.

   The apparent contradiction is made more glaring by the fact that Mr
   Brand has made a tidy packet from long-term planning through his
   Global Business Network (GBN), a respected scenario-planning and
   futurology outfit. Some greens grouse that GBN's work with big oil
   companies and the American military is unethical, but Mr Brand has
   little patience for such narrow-mindedness. "Saying all companies are
   evil is like saying all greens are romantic twits," he says. "You need
   to discriminate!" To bolster his point, he points to what he calls the
   quiet but influential role that Royal Dutch/Shell played in South
   Africa's peaceful end to apartheid. He also defends his military
   clients with vigour, noting that they are often "more serious" and
   "longer-term thinkers" than business clients.

   So how does he respond to the apparent conflict between the
   long-termism of the Long Now project and the much shorter-term view of
   nuclear waste he uses to justify new nuclear power? He neatly
   sidesteps the contradiction. "Coal and carbon-loading the atmosphere
   are much bigger problems for the future than nuclear waste, which is a
   relatively minor risk," he says.

   Shades of green

   This willingness to get his hands dirty and balance one risk against
   another, rather than clinging to ideologically pure positions when
   confronted with difficult choices, sets Mr Brand apart from the many
   ideologues in the environmental movement. Indeed, he proudly calls
   himself an "eco-pragmatist". He argues that two ideological camps have
   dominated the green movement for too long: "the scientists and the
   romantics". The former group has been stuck in the ivory tower, while
   the latter has held on to noble but impractical views that, he
   reckons, have often been contrary to rational scientific thinking. The
   grip that these two rival camps have had on environmentalism, he says,
   explains its malaise.

   But growing public awareness of climate change and other green
   concerns promises to end this. "Environmental change changes
   everything," he insists, "and among the biggest change of all will be
   in environmentalism itself." As environmental issues have moved up the
   technological agenda, says Mr Brand, there has been a large influx of
   engineers into the environmental movement. These "techies" had
   previously been deeply sceptical of greenery, but he now thinks they
   may save the cause even as they save the planet. Unlike the romantics
   and the airy scientists, he says, "engineers focus on solving
   problems."

   He points approvingly to Elon Musk, a South African technology
   entrepreneur, and his green engineers at Tesla Motors, an electric-car
   firm. Mr Brand also tips his hat toward Mr Lovins, whom he praises as
   an early example of a problem-solving "engineer" (he is actually a
   physicist by training) who embraced the green cause. But this new
   generation of green engineers will only be able to transform the
   environmental movement, Mr Brand reckons, if the old guard allows it
   to. "Let's see if there is an allergic reaction to this infusion or
   real progress," he quips.

   Mr Brand's own pragmatism can be seen in his willingness to own up to
   his mistakes and learn from them. When his alarmism over the Y2K
   computer bug turned out to be wrong, for example, it made him realise
   that his own personal computer was a poor proxy for the world at
   large, which is "modular, shockproof and robust". And the key mistake
   made by the Club of Rome's forecasts (which he calls "self-defeating
   prophesies"), he now acknowledges, was to see the world as static, and
   to place too little faith in the possibilities of technological
   progress.

   His critics might argue that Mr Brand now places too much faith in
   clever engineers and fancy technology to solve the world's
   environmental problems. But he can respond that his pragmatic approach
   goes back a long way, and has deep roots. As he put it in the
   introduction to "The Whole Earth Catalogue", written four decades ago:
   "We are as gods and might as well get good at it."

