
   New Labour is losing the support of business, and it matters

   ONLY in the City of London, where banks, shops and other employers
   choose the corporation that oversees the "square mile", can business
   say that taxation is truly based on representation. Elsewhere it has
   to hope the citizenry elects governments that are firm-friendly, and
   will resist the urge to nationalise, meddle or tax companies too much.
   But if business could vote, whom would it support?

   Surprisingly, as the party at least pretended to champion socialism
   until the early 1990s, the answer for most of the past decade would
   have been Labour. But that is now changing, and Gordon Brown, the
   prime minister, is fast discovering just how fickle businesspeople can
   be. They are trickling back to the Conservative Party, in earlier
   times their natural ally.

   This week, at the annual conference of the main business lobbying
   group, the CBI, the list of complaints was long, taking in red tape
   (too tangled), roads and airports (too congested) and taxes (too
   high). This much is standard: the CBI has members to recruit and dues
   to collect. Nor are such complaints made only against Labour
   governments. In 1980 the CBI chairman of the day threatened a
   "bare-knuckled fight" with Margaret Thatcher's government over
   interest rates and the price of sterling.

   But this year's conference was more sharply party-political than
   usual. Martin Broughton, chairman of British Airways and president of
   the CBI, not only criticised Mr Brown's policies and record but also
   praised David Cameron, the Conservative leader, for creating a strong
   "electable opposition" with views on business that are "well in synch
   with ours".

   Such words are heard with increasing frequency in British boardrooms
   these days. Many directors of top companies privately express their
   growing frustration with the government. Other business organisations,
   such as the Institute of Directors and British Chambers of Commerce,
   are also stepping up their attacks. Sensitive to shifting currents are
   the policy wonks at CEBR, an economic consultancy, who put out a paper
   this week that was catchily called "We need to start considering what
   a Tory Government might do".

   The strongest sign yet of a shift in sentiment is that even long-time
   business friends and supporters of Mr Brown and his party have become
   more openly critical. Some have shown a startling enthusiasm for
   change. Among them is Sir Ronald Cohen, a doyen of Britain's
   private-equity industry and long-time donor to the Labour Party. He
   said recently in a newspaper interview that there was "not much
   difference between the two parties" and that he would not mind if a
   Conservative government came to power.

   Why this shift, and why now? Cynics say it simply reflects the
   parties' changing fortunes. The Tories have not seen the inside of
   Downing Street since 1997; practicality counselled firms to back the
   winning horse. Now that political power is being seriously contested
   again, business may simply be placing its next bet.

   But there is more to it than that. Even before New Labour took office,
   it was busily buffing its pro-business credentials. Once in power the
   party both embraced the market and set the central bank free from
   politicians to set interest rates. Whether by skill or good fortune,
   Labour presided over a decade of low inflation, low interest rates and
   sustained economic growth. This was one of the main reasons for the
   party's electoral longevity.

   The drift away

   Three things explain why business support is draining away from
   Labour. First, its reputation for sound economic management has been
   damaged by its bungled handling of Northern Rock, a troubled mortgage
   lender, and by concerns about the slowing economy and housing market.
   Second, businesspeople suspect Labour has grown arrogant in power and
   no longer feels obliged to keep its side of the bargain struck a
   decade ago, especially with that friend of the rich, Tony Blair, out
   of the picture. Third, there is a growing sense of outrage at the vast
   sums the government has spent on the public sector to less than
   optimal effect, while the wealth-creating side of the economy has been
   weighed down with regulations and tax.

   Take the high-handed decision announced in October to raise
   capital-gains taxes to a flat 18% from an effective 10% on most
   business assets. Aimed at capturing some of the gains made by partners
   in private-equity firms, it is widely seen as an attack on small
   business. "The damage is in the signal it sends, which is that this is
   an economy that doesn't value entrepreneurs," says Arnaud de Meyer of
   the Judge Business School at Cambridge University.

   Taxing small businesspeople, who are mainly steadfast Tories, is
   unlikely to cost Mr Brown many votes. But John Curtice of Strathclyde
   University reckons public confidence in Labour as the party most
   trusted to run the economy, already declining, is likely to ebb faster
   as businesspeople air their doubts. A recent Populus poll shows the
   Tories well ahead on this point. Although business has no vote, in
   forfeiting its support, Mr Brown may well be scuppering his chances of
   re-election.

