


   Why the Liberal Democrats are the party of the future


   LIKE a big (but not that big) group of hostages, oscillating between
   hope of escape and fear, the mood of the Liberal Democrats at their
   conference in Brighton this week swung between gloom and elation. They
   were gloomy about their depressed poll ratings, and the erratic ones
   of their leader, Sir Menzies Campbell; they were intermittently elated
   by the glorious future predicted by their ideologues. "The tide of
   history is on our side!" they exhorted, and "The old politics are
   dead!" A lot of mean things can be and have been said about
   gentlemanly Sir Menzies and his party; but Bagehot proposes to pass
   over his lame jokes and calculating would-be heirs, the eccentric
   speeches and the sandals. Because the key thing about the Lib Dems is
   that they are almost certainly right. In two important ways, the tide
   of history and the evolving nature of politics are on their side--sort
   of.

   One of the mini-controversies of the conference was over Sir Menzies's
   avowed enthusiasm for "hammering" the rich. Both the enthusiasm and
   the controversy arise from the heterogeneous nature of Liberal
   Democrat voters: they are a tense alliance of disillusioned lefties
   and well-meaning patricians, genuine liberals and holders of ancestral
   grudges against the other two parties. To keep this ragtag coalition
   together, the Lib Dems need to "narrowcast"--for example, by
   signalling a more redistributive attitude to taxation to voters in the
   Midlands without frightening the horsey types in southern marginals.

   Narrowcasting is a tough trick, as David Cameron and his Conservative
   Party also learned recently, when they tried to allay misgivings among
   the Tory ultras without compromising their cuddly new centrist image.
   But it is increasingly a trick that all the main parties have to pull
   off--because the old politics are dying, as the Lib Dem ideologues
   insist.

   This realignment may be a less dramatic shift than the decline of the
   Liberals after the first world war, but it is happening. The
   traditional politics of left and right, at least defined in terms of
   class and economics, is obsolescent. For the time being, familiar
   issues such as health and education are still salient. Tribal party
   loyalties, based on old class identities, still obtain: there are
   millions of Britons, in ex-industrial northern towns and patriotic
   suburbs, for whom voting for anyone other than Labour or the Tories is
   more or less unthinkable. But, like religious identities, those bonds
   are weakening, as the economy that created them is transformed. New
   political axes will come to rival, if not entirely replace, the old
   economic one: liberty versus security, say, or liberty versus
   environmentalism. The result will be that, even more than Tony Blair
   in pursuit of his 1997 landslide, parties will need to yoke together
   disparate coalitions of dissimilar voters in order to win elections.

   Dream on

   The second way in which the future of politics will look Liberal
   Democrat is how parties go about the yoking. Beneath the headlines
   about hammering--and beyond the mini-scandal of Sir Menzies's
   ill-advised photo-opportunity with an organic toilet--the Lib Dems,
   and especially the impressive triumvirate of Nick Clegg, David Laws
   and Chris Huhne, actually have quite a lot of sensible policies. They
   have authentically liberal and considered things to say about prisons
   and immigration; on using the courts rather than extra-judicial powers
   to punish terrorists; on the environment; and on educating
   disadvantaged children. But the sad truth is that, aside from their
   distinctive stance on Iraq, their popularity and their policies are
   only loosely related.

   That is largely for reasons peculiar to them. Voters tend to take
   seriously only pledges that are likely to be implemented, which
   excludes those made by the Lib Dems. Many votes for them are really
   protests against their opponents: their recent poll doldrums have
   reflected Mr Cameron's early bounce, and latterly Gordon Brown's, more
   than their own performance. In these circumstances, as the worldlier
   Lib Dems admit, having policies is really a sort of irrational
   exuberance, mainly required to remind voters that they exist.

   Quite apart from this third-party predicament, though, policy is a
   decreasingly important factor in politics generally--certainly
   compared with the genuinely ideological clashes of the 1980s. Part of
   the explanation for that trend is that Labour and the Tories now agree
   about so much, even if they conceal their similarity by
   narcissistically inflating small differences. Mr Brown's omnivorous
   pilfering of everyone else's best ideas is blurring the distinction
   more than ever (which hurts the Lib Dems, since this coalescence has
   made grumpy Labour and Tory voters readier to switch straight to the
   other big party). Part of it is the influence of digital media on how
   political opinions are formed. That has made having a charismatic and
   ideally photogenic leader vital (which is why some people have been
   beastly about Sir Menzies). Policy itself is becoming the aroma of
   politics, rather than its substance--as it already is for the Lib
   Dems.

   In one respect, however, the Liberal Democrats are and will remain
   unique. Not only do their policies not determine their popularity:
   their popularity will not determine their chances of wielding power.
   For that they need a hung parliament after the next election, whenever
   it is; and for a hung parliament they need Labour to do badly. Since
   the Conservatives are second in most of Labour's marginal seats, that
   in turn depends mostly on the Tories doing better, rather than on the
   Lib Dems' own results. Unfortunately for them, probably only a reform
   of the voting system will alter that basic dependency--because even if
   the intellectual shape of politics changes, the institutional shape,
   based on the two great party machines, ruthless and adaptable, is
   likely to stay the same. The Lib Dems may have seen the political
   future, but that does not mean they will inherit it.

