
   The sleaze spreads north 

   FOR Gordon Brown, the party-funding scandal which has already claimed
   the job of the Labour Party's general secretary, Peter Watt, and
   threatens senior figures in the government shows no sign of going
   away. It has instead spread north to his native Scotland, where Wendy
   Alexander, Labour's leader in the devolved Parliament, is fighting to
   save her career.

   The sum involved in Ms Alexander's case (£950, or $1,960) is comically
   small next to the more than £660,000 given to the Labour Party by
   David Abrahams, a Newcastle businessman, through intermediaries. Yet
   Ms Alexander, seen but recently as the Scottish Labour Party's shining
   hope, boobed tremendously. To finance her leadership campaign (which,
   since she was the only candidate, was not a costly affair) she raised
   £16,000, including £950 from Paul Green. A property developer who
   lives in the Channel Islands, Mr Green cannot vote in British
   elections, so accepting his cash was against the law.

   Ms Alexander maintains that she was led to believe the money came from
   a Glasgow company controlled by Mr Green. But the company denies any
   knowledge of the donation. Mr Green insists it was a personal
   contribution, even brandishing a letter of thanks from Ms Alexander
   sent to his Jersey home. One head has already rolled: Charlie Gordon,
   a Labour Member of the Scottish Parliament (MSP) from Glasgow, who
   solicited Mr Green's donation, has resigned as the party's transport
   spokesman. But this has failed to pacify those such as Sir Alistair
   Graham, a former chairman of Westminster's Committee on Standards in
   Public Life, who believe that Ms Alexander should consider her
   position, too.

   Many wonder whether Ms Alexander, who claims that a pile of evidence
   sent to the Electoral Commission will clear her, is under orders from
   Mr Brown to stand firm. Resigning would, after all, increase pressure
   on Harriet Harman, the Labour deputy leader, who accepted money from
   Mr Abrahams's intermediary during her campaign for that post, and on
   Peter Hain, the work and pensions secretary, who failed to declare a
   £5,000 donation during the same race. It would also have some
   importance for Mr Brown himself. Ms Alexander is his protégée; her
   brother, Douglas Alexander, is his international-development secretary
   and one of his closest advisers.

   The prime minister may also want Ms Alexander to remain because he
   trusts no one else to revive Scottish Labour's bleak fortunes. Up
   against a Scottish National Party (SNP) that echoes Scottish public
   opinion in urging stronger devolved government, on November 30th she
   proposed a constitutional commission to examine the case for more
   powers. With Mr Brown's approval, she argued that it should consider
   more tax-raising powers and a new funding settlement for the United
   Kingdom's four constituent nations.

   Conservatives and Liberal Democrats like the idea, seeing it as a
   unionist counter-thrust against the Nationalists' ambitions for
   full-blown independence. The hardest sell is to Scottish Labour
   itself, which is suspicious of anything that looks like doing the
   SNP's job for them. "Is there anyone else with the clout with Gordon
   Brown to see this through?" wonders one Tory MSP. "I don't think so."

   So more than Ms Alexander's fate rests on whether the Electoral
   Commission concludes that she took "reasonable steps" to check that
   the £950 donation was legal, and therefore did not "knowingly" accept
   an illegal gift. If it does not, she is likely to go the same way as
   Mr Watt and Mr Gordon. That would make life even tougher for the
   beleaguered Mr Brown.

