
   Should the stricken bank or the stricken taxpayer be salvaged?

   LIKE a man in intensive care, Northern Rock is hooked up to a
   life-supporting transfusion of taxpayers' cash. First extended by the
   Bank of England in mid-September, the loan was expected to stabilise
   the stricken lender and allow it to make a quick recovery (or a
   graceful exit under someone else's name) once the turmoil in global
   credit markets had eased. Not a chance. Eight weeks later, Northern
   Rock's vital signs are deteriorating fast and its debt to the state is
   mounting.

   The government is thought to have put in up to £23 billion ($48
   billion), and the sum is growing by £2 billion-3 billion a week as
   depositors continue to flee. At least £10 billion of the bank's £24
   billion in retail savings has already been withdrawn, some say, and
   Northern Rock is having little luck persuading banks to lend it new
   money as its existing loans come due. State support for Northern Rock
   already exceeds Britain's transport budget and could soon surpass the
   £32 billion allocated to defence--a particular embarrassment for a
   government accused of under-equipping its soldiers in combat zones.

   But problems bigger than embarrassment loom. The authorities are
   desperate to regain their reputation as prudent custodian of the
   world's biggest international financial centre. The task is not helped
   by recurrent bouts of finger-pointing. In a radio interview on
   November 6th, Mervyn King, the governor of the Bank of England, seemed
   to blame Alistair Darling, the chancellor of the exchequer, for
   missing opportunities to avert the crisis.

   Three big questions now face the Treasury, which has taken the lead in
   sorting out the Northern Rock mess. The first is how to get taxpayers'
   money back, and quickly. Some believe that this would be most easily
   achieved by breaking up the bank and selling it off in bits. But this
   conflicts with a second, which is how to avoid destroying the bank and
   losing highly visible jobs in the north-east, one of England's poorer
   regions and, inconveniently, one filled with hitherto stalwart Labour
   voters. The third is whether either goal can be achieved without
   handing private-equity investors, in particular, a chance to make a
   bundle on the back of the government guarantee. Such an outcome would
   set the seal on the most ignominious episode in recent British
   banking.

   Saving jobs seems the likelier choice. Two of the three possible
   buyers to emerge so far are believed to want to keep Northern Rock's
   branch network. First in the field was J.C. Flowers, a private-equity
   group with a history of buying and turning around distressed banks.
   The firm has an impressive list of City grandees lined up to run the
   bank and (less illustriously) an ongoing court case in America that
   stems from its abandonment of an agreed deal to buy Sallie Mae, a
   government-guaranteed lender to students. Sir Richard Branson's Virgin
   Group, a second bidder, has a petite but innovative financial business
   and prudent plans to turn Northern Rock into a smaller, risk-averse
   mortgage bank. Cerberus, another private-equity firm, is keeping mum
   about its plans.

   None of the proposals sits well with the Treasury. All three groups
   are understood to have insisted the central bank promise to keep
   lending to Northern Rock, and at a rate lower than the penal one it is
   charging now. Some £25 billion-30 billion (including what the central
   bank has already put in) may be needed to keep the bank going, and
   none of the three is thought to have raised more than £15 billion.

   To break this logjam, Blackstone, a private-equity firm turned
   gamekeeper, was brought in on October 31st to advise Northern Rock
   under the Treasury's alert eye. Blackstone is thought to have
   contacted some 50 institutions, including French, Spanish, Indian and
   Chinese banks, to widen the pool of bidders.

   Blackstone is also approaching lenders to secure credit lines
   totalling some £25 billion, promising to improve Northern Rock's
   credit rating, if need be by cleaning up its balance sheet and selling
   less easily traded assets to specialist hedge funds. In theory this
   could allow the government to withdraw much of its support, but few
   believe it will get off lightly.

   At the punitive rate Northern Rock pays the Bank of England today, it
   cannot make a profit on any new mortgages and is losing money on many
   of its old ones. Its new lending is thought to have slumped to a few
   hundred million pounds a month, less than a quarter of the volume in
   the first half of the year. The longer it takes to reach a deal, the
   less there will be left to buy. A restructuring and sale may save
   Northern Rock from a lingering death, but any recovery is likely to be
   slow and painful.

