
   Doing less for Britain's allegedly unhappy children might be the best
   policy

   IT HAS been a bad year to be young in Britain. In February UNICEF
   concluded that Britain was the worst place for children in the
   industrialised world, ranking it lowest on all sorts of measures,
   including, heartrendingly, whether children felt their peers were
   "kind and helpful". A spate of shootings and stabbings of teenagers by
   teenagers marred the summer. The autumn saw researchers lining up to
   report that expensive education policies had had little or no benefit;
   earlier this month OECD figures showed Britain's schools outclassed by
   other countries'. Child obesity, teenage pregnancy and under-age
   drinking in Britain are all high by international standards, and some
   problems are getting worse. The number of children living in poverty,
   which had fallen every year since 1999, was shown to have increased by
   100,000 in 2005-06.

   So when Ed Balls, the schools secretary, stood up in Parliament on
   December 11th to announce measures to make Britain "the best place in
   the world for children to grow up", his chutzpah was impressive. The
   ten-year "Children's Plan" he outlined was less so. It is a sprawling
   hymn to government intervention in all aspects of children's lives.
   "Is it necessary for the Whitehall screwdriver to reach into every
   school in the country?" asked David Laws, the Liberal Democrats'
   education spokesman.

   The hyperactivity was inspired by a basic observation: that children
   often fail in school because of what is happening at home. An analysis
   published on December 13th by the Sutton Trust, an education charity,
   provides the latest evidence that gaps between rich and poor open up
   early. Among children born in 2000, the poor ones with a good
   vocabulary at age three had fallen back just two years later;
   meanwhile, rich but less verbally adept ones made up ground. If the
   trend continues, the researchers say, by the age of seven the paths of
   the two groups will have crossed.

   The solution offered in the children's plan is to get schools to do
   many of the things that a good parent would do. In future all schools
   are to stay open from 8am to 6pm in term-time, and offer a range of
   activities, from artistic to sporting. And other professionals are to
   operate from the schools: social workers, health visitors and even
   community police officers.

   Schools will also get their hands on children earlier. The entitlement
   to free nursery care is being extended from 12 to 15 hours for three-
   and four-year-olds and to 20,000 two-year-olds from the poorest
   families. An "early-years foundation-stage" framework--already
   nicknamed the "toddlers' curriculum"--is due to come into force next
   autumn. It sets out exactly what small children are expected to be
   able to do, from birth to age five, and child carers in both state-run
   and private nurseries will have to monitor progress against these
   standards. There are 69 early-learning goals and more than 500
   development milestones, including the instruction that under-ones
   should "play with their own fingers and toes" and one-year-olds should
   "become absorbed in putting objects in and out of containers".
   Three-year-olds must start learning to read and write--earlier than
   children in the rest of Europe, indeed in most of the world.

   But some fear that this attempt to help will in fact compound the
   problem. Opposition parties and parent-teacher associations attacked
   the expansion of government monitoring and measuring into the earliest
   years. A starry coalition of concerned professionals, including
   Penelope Leach, an expert on child care, and Dorothy Rowe, a
   psychologist, have launched a campaign against plans to make
   pre-school care more structured and academic in style. Far from
   helping British children catch up with their peers in other countries,
   the campaigners say, such a "head start" in literacy may cause
   emotional and behavioural problems later on. In fact, British children
   should start formal school later than they do now--which, at age four,
   is already younger than children in most other places.

   Some optimists note that the children's plan offers a few scraps of
   comfort to those who worry that British youngsters are being
   frogmarched through their childhood, with little time to stand and
   stare. Summer-born children, whose younger start puts them at a
   disadvantage right into secondary school, may be allowed to wait a
   little before starting school. Britain's rigid approach to grouping
   children by age, regardless of educational progress, may be relaxed a
   little. And if the results of a two-year pilot study are favourable,
   youngsters will no longer take the same tests together at the end of
   primary school, but will have tailored papers appropriate to their
   level whenever teachers deem them ready.

   The biggest worry, though, is that a plan that sets out to do
   everything for all children will end up doing nothing well. Removing
   the spotlight from schooling risks losing the focus necessary to
   improve the results of the groups that fall behind, says Alan Smithers
   of the University of Buckingham. He likens the plans for schools that
   run all aspects of children's and families' lives to the sort of
   corporate merger that sees cross-cutting synergies and holistic
   opportunities--but ends up destroying value. "I can imagine that in
   2020 an education minister will announce an exciting new sort of
   institution that concentrates exclusively on educating children, and
   makes a virtue of doing that one thing superlatively," he says.
   Perhaps they might be called schools.

