
   Energy: Attitudes to nuclear power are shifting in response to climate
   change and fears over the security of the supply of fossil fuels. The
   technology of nuclear power has been changing, too

                                                                    Alamy

                                   Alamy

   OVER the next few decades global electricity consumption is expected
   to double. At the same time, many power plants in rich countries,
   built back in the 1960s and 1970s, are nearing the end of their
   projected lifespans. Meanwhile, concern is swelling both about global
   warming, and about the Western world's increasing dependence on a
   shrinking number of hostile or unstable countries for imports of oil
   and gas. The solution to this conundrum, in the eyes of many
   governments, is nuclear power.

   Around the world, 31 reactors are under construction and many more are
   in the planning stages. Some of the most ambitious programmes are
   under way in developing countries. Both China and India are building
   several reactors and intend to increase their nuclear-generating
   capacity several times over in the next 15 years. Some countries, such
   as Turkey and Vietnam, are considering starting nuclear-power
   programmes, and others, including Argentina and South Africa, plan to
   expand their existing ones.

   The rich world is also re-examining the case for nuclear. America is
   expecting a rush of applications to build new reactors in the coming
   months--the first in almost 30 years. Britain's prime minister, Gordon
   Brown, recently affirmed his support for a new generation of nuclear
   power plants. Construction of a new one in Finland, western Europe's
   first for 15 years, began in 2005; work is just starting on another of
   the same design in France. Other European countries that had frozen or
   decided to scrap their nuclear programmes are rethinking their plans.

   There are good reasons for this enthusiasm. Nuclear reactors emit
   almost none of the greenhouse gases responsible for global warming.
   They are fuelled by uranium, which is relatively abundant and is
   available from many sources, including reassuringly stable places such
   as Canada and Australia.

   At the moment 439 nuclear reactors in 31 countries supply 15% of the
   world's electricity. Even without a price on carbon emissions, says
   Fatih Birol, the chief economist of the International Energy Agency
   (IEA), the worldwide generating capacity of nuclear power plants will
   probably increase from about 370 gigawatts today to 520 gigawatts in
   2030. But if there were a price on carbon dioxide, says Mr Birol, "it
   could grow even faster."

   But there are also good reasons for scepticism. Nuclear plants are
   expensive: each can cost several billion dollars to build. Worse, in
   the past, ill-conceived designs, safety scares and the regulatory
   delays they gave rise to made nuclear plants even more costly than
   their hefty price-tags suggest. Vendors of new nuclear plants, such as
   Areva, General Electric (GE), Hitachi and Westinghouse, argue that
   things are different now. The latest designs incorporate suggestions
   from utilities and operators with decades of experience, and should,
   their creators say, make new plants safer and easier to operate. They
   believe the simpler new reactors, with their longer lifespans and
   reduced maintenance costs, will also improve the economics of the
   industry.

                                                  [spacer.gif] [gray.gif]
                                                             [spacer.gif]
       "The latest generation of reactors includes important improvements
                                                     over prior designs."
                                                             [spacer.gif]
                                                               [gray.gif]

   All nuclear reactors rely on nuclear fission, a process that was
   discovered in the 1930s. When certain heavy atoms are struck by a
   neutron, they absorb it, become unstable and split apart. This results
   in two lighter atoms, and two or three neutrons are ejected. The
   process releases large amounts of energy, much of it in the form of
   the kinetic energy of the fast-moving fission products. This kinetic
   energy is converted to heat as the fission products slow down.

   If the ejected neutrons go on to strike other unstable atoms nearby,
   those too can break apart, releasing further neutrons in a process
   known as a chain reaction. When enough of these neutrons produce
   further fissions--rather than escaping, bouncing off or being absorbed
   by atoms that do not split apart--the process becomes self-sustaining.
   An uncontrolled chain reaction within a large amount of fissionable
   material can lead to an explosive release of energy, as in nuclear
   weapons. But in nuclear reactors, which contain far less fissionable
   material, the chain reaction and the release of energy are carefully
   controlled.

   War and peace

   In 1942 the physicist Enrico Fermi led a group of scientists who built
   the first nuclear reactor as part of the Manhattan Project--America's
   effort to build the first atomic bomb. Although the reactor was simple
   in design, it included features that are part of almost every nuclear
   power plant today. The reactor core consisted of pellets of uranium
   fuel inside bricks made of graphite, which served as a "moderator",
   reducing the speed of the neutrons in order to maximise their ability
   to cause further fissions. (Most reactors today use water as the
   moderator.) In addition, the set-up included "control rods" made of a
   material that absorbed neutrons. These rods could be inserted into the
   core to slow or shut down the chain reaction if necessary.

   Although all of this was done with a view to building an effective
   weapon, the scientists involved always knew that nuclear technologies
   also had promising peaceful uses. In 1953 America's president, Dwight
   Eisenhower, gave his famous "Atoms for Peace" speech before the United
   Nations General Assembly, in which he called for the controlled
   application of nuclear energy in a civilian context. In the mid-1950s
   the world's first civilian nuclear power stations appeared in America,
   Britain and Russia.

   America's first civilian nuclear power plant, of a type called a
   pressurised water reactor (PWR), was designed by Westinghouse and
   adapted from the reactors used in nuclear submarines. Inside a PWR,
   water--which is kept under high pressure to prevent it from
   boiling--has a double function. In a closed "primary" loop, it serves
   as a coolant for the reactor core and as a moderator, to slow down the
   fast neutrons created during fission. As the water in the primary loop
   circulates, it becomes very hot. This heat energy is then transferred
   to a secondary loop of water. The resulting steam is used to spin
   turbines that generate electricity.

   Nuclear's golden age

   In the 1950s the pursuit of atomic energy was viewed as a largely
   positive endeavour. In a speech in 1954 before a group of science
   writers, the head of America's Atomic Energy Commission, Lewis
   Strauss, even declared that one day nuclear power would be "too cheap
   to meter". By the mid-1960s America's two leading reactor vendors,
   General Electric (GE) and Westinghouse, were involved in an intense
   competition. GE began to offer "turnkey" contracts to utilities, in
   which it delivered an entire nuclear plant for a fixed price. To keep
   up, Westinghouse followed suit, causing a surge in orders. But this
   sales ploy turned out to be a money-loser for both firms in the end.

   The boom in reactor construction coincided with the beginnings of
   America's environmental movement and a sense of growing unease about
   nuclear power. By the early 1970s uncertainties over radioactive-waste
   disposal, the effects of radiation and the potential consequences of a
   nuclear accident prompted a backlash. One frightening scenario was the
   "China Syndrome": the idea that molten radioactive fuel undergoing a
   runaway reaction might burn its way through the bottom of the
   reactor's pressure vessel and containment structure, and then down
   into the Earth. Of course the fuel would never actually reach China,
   but were it to breach the containment structure, the result could be a
   huge release of radioactivity.

   As electricity demand levelled off and interest rates shot up,
   applications to build nuclear reactors started to decline, at least in
   America. Then in 1979 a serious accident occurred at a plant at Three
   Mile Island, near Harrisburg, Pennsylvania. A combination of
   mechanical failures and operator errors caused a partial melting of
   the reactor core. Fortunately the pressure vessel housing the core
   held, and virtually no dangerous radioactive gases escaped from the
   plant, says J. Samuel Walker, the historian of the Nuclear Regulatory
   Commission, the agency that regulates America's nuclear power plants.
   Although the accident nearly killed off America's nuclear-power
   industry, it did not harm any people.

   But a few years later a true disaster occurred. In 1986 a reactor at
   Chernobyl in Ukraine became unstable, and a power surge inside the
   core led to two explosions that destroyed the reactor and blew its
   roof off. As a result, significant amounts of radioactive material
   escaped into the environment. About 30 emergency workers died of
   radiation exposure shortly after the accident. Thousands more people
   who lived in contaminated areas developed serious health problems,
   some of them fatal. The cause of the accident was found to be a
   combination of operator errors and inherent flaws in the plant's
   design. Industry insiders pointed out that reactors based on this
   flawed design had not been deployed in Western countries. Even so, the
   accident further undermined public confidence in nuclear power.

   Although the nuclear industry faced decline or stagnation in many
   Western countries in the 1980s, it thrived in one of them: France.
   After the oil crisis of 1973, France decided to pursue the goal of
   fossil-fuel independence. With few energy resources of its own,
   pursuing nuclear power seemed like the best strategy. All the
   commercial nuclear plants operating in France today were based on
   technology devised by Westinghouse, which licensed its PWR design to
   France in the 1960s. Today the country has 59 nuclear reactors
   supplying 78% of its electricity.

   Nuclear has worked well in France in part because it is accepted by
   politicians and the public alike, so there are few delays due to
   protests or planning problems. Elsewhere, these have lengthened the
   construction period and enormously increased costs. Once up and
   running, however, nuclear plants have a distinct advantage over those
   run on coal or natural gas: they need comparatively little fuel to
   operate. Although the price of uranium jumped from about $70 per pound
   in January to about $130 in mid-July, operating costs of nuclear power
   plants have changed very little. (Construction accounts for as much as
   three-quarters of the cost of nuclear generation.) Moreover, the rise
   in the price has prompted an exploration boom that will ultimately
   lead to more mines and greater supply. Uranium is not thought to be
   particularly scarce--it has simply not been very profitable to look
   for it recently.

   The latest generation of reactors, which evolved from models
   constructed in the 1970s and 1980s, include important improvements
   over prior designs. Westinghouse's new AP1000, for example, has
   "passive safety" systems that can prevent a meltdown during an
   emergency without operator intervention. If the reactor loses pressure
   because of a loss of coolant, for example, pressurised tanks deliver
   water to the core, since the pressure in the tanks is higher than that
   in the core, explains Howard Bruschi, who has worked for Westinghouse
   since the 1960s and is now a consultant to the company. The new
   reactor's simplified design also means that fewer motors, pumps and
   pipes are needed, reducing not only the potential for mechanical
   errors, but also costs of maintenance, inspections and repairs.
   Westinghouse recently agreed to provide four new plants to China.

   Soul of a new reactor

   Meanwhile, Areva, a French nuclear company, is engineering ever more
   powerful plants. Its first reactor, which began operating in 1977, was
   rated at 900 megawatts; its latest model, the evolutionary power
   reactor (EPR), is a 1,600-megawatt design. The company has already
   begun building two such plants in Europe: one in Finland, which is now
   expected to start operating in 2011, about two years late, and another
   in France. Both the EPR and the AP1000, along with GE's latest design,
   are among the plants under consideration by American utilities.

   A demonstration plant of a completely different type, a "pebble bed"
   reactor, is scheduled to be built in South Africa starting in 2009.
   Based on technology that originated in Germany, its design is unique
   in several ways. For one thing, its small size (165 megawatts) should
   make it comparatively fast and cheap to build; depending on power
   needs, several units sharing a single control room could be
   constructed on one site. And the uranium fuel is encapsulated in
   rugged "pebbles", the size of tennis balls, which are designed to
   withstand a loss of coolant without disintegrating, making the reactor
   extremely safe. Andrew Kadak, a professor at the Massachusetts
   Institute of Technology (MIT), who has been developing a smaller,
   alternative pebble-bed design with his students, is convinced that
   "these reactors cannot melt down."

   Even though new designs for nuclear plants may be safer, they still
   generate toxic waste. After about three years of use, the fuel is
   depleted of most fissile uranium but has accumulated long-lived
   radioactive materials that cannot be burned in conventional reactors.
   At the moment most such waste is stored near the plant until it can be
   moved to a permanent facility. But no country is yet operating a final
   disposal site for highly radioactive nuclear waste. America's Yucca
   Mountain repository, for example, is not expected to be ready for use
   for many years, if ever. In some countries nuclear waste is
   "reprocessed"--a procedure in which plutonium is separated from the
   rest of the spent fuel, which can then be made into new fuel.
   Plutonium, of course, can be used to make nuclear weapons. Because of
   concern over nuclear proliferation, America has not engaged in
   civilian reprocessing since 1977.

   As part of a new multinational initiative called the Global Nuclear
   Energy Partnership (GNEP), however, America's Department of Energy is
   supporting a type of spent fuel reprocessing which does not separate
   the plutonium from other highly radioactive materials in the waste,
   thus making it more resistant to proliferation than traditional
   reprocessing. This mixture of plutonium and other radioactive elements
   could then be turned into fuel suitable for use in "fast" reactors.
   Most reactors in operation today are called "thermal" reactors,
   because they use a moderator to slow down the neutrons and promote
   fission. Fast reactors, in contrast, do not employ moderators and use
   much faster neutrons to produce fissions. So they can consume many of
   the long-lived radioactive materials that thermal reactors cannot.

                                                                       AP

                                     AP

                  They don't build them like they used to

   This approach could extract far more energy from a given amount of
   nuclear fuel while at the same time reducing the volume and toxicity
   of nuclear waste. Proponents of fast reactors reckon that most of the
   remaining waste would need to be stored for only a few centuries,
   perhaps, rather than hundreds of thousands of years, once the most
   radioactive elements had been separated out. According to the Nuclear
   Energy Institute, a lobby group in Washington, DC, this could mean
   that America would need only one nuclear-waste repository. In the long
   term, a fleet of fast reactors could use nuclear fuel so efficiently
   that "for all practical purposes, the uranium would be inexhaustible,"
   says William Hannum, a nuclear physicist who used to work at America's
   Argonne National Laboratory.

   But opponents of this strategy call it a distraction that could hinder
   the renewal of the nuclear power industry. For one thing, many new
   fast reactors and fuel-reprocessing facilities would have to be built,
   adding billions of dollars to the enormous sums already required for
   new nuclear plants. In addition, some of the technologies in question
   have not been demonstrated on a commercial scale yet. And the GNEP
   reverses America's ban on civilian reprocessing, which critics say
   could encourage the proliferation of weapons-grade materials.

   In the end, the deployment of new nuclear reactors will depend on many
   factors, including successful waste and proliferation management,
   improved economics, and perhaps most important, convincing the public
   that nuclear reactors can be operated safely. Despite these obstacles,
   there is an undeniable mood of optimism in the industry. Whether that
   will be enough to spark the deployment of the hundreds of reactors
   that will be needed to help mitigate the effects of global warming
   remains to be seen, cautions Richard Lester, a professor of nuclear
   science and engineering at MIT. Were there to be another disaster like
   Chernobyl, or a successful terrorist attack on a nuclear plant, all
   bets would be off. But for now most people in the industry agree that
   nuclear power's prospects look brighter than they have in a long time.

