
   A choice of migration policies 

   THOSE setting migration policy in rich countries face an almost
   impossible task. The demands of demography and economics--shrinking
   and ageing workforces, a growing shortage of people to fill jobs
   requiring both high and low skills, and increasingly flexible and open
   economies--all point to more migration. Moreover, within the European
   Union workers from the 12 countries that have joined in the past few
   years will soon have the legal right to live and work in any part of
   the union. On the other hand, voters in many rich countries seem
   increasingly hostile to immigration, which suggests that politicians
   may find it more and more difficult to allow immigration to continue
   at its current high level.

                                                                      AFP

                                    AFP

                      Work is here, but where is home?

   If only there were some means of getting all the benefits of migration
   but none of the costs. That is the thinking behind the latest solution
   now being promoted: circular migration. Europe's commissioner for
   justice and home affairs, Franco Frattini, wants to see more temporary
   migrants in the EU. For the highly skilled, he suggests a blue card
   (similar to America's green one) to ease the temporary entry of
   professionals and their families into Europe. Foreign workers with the
   most skills make up just 1.7% of the workforce, about half the rate in
   America and far less than in Canada or Australia, and competition for
   them is getting more intense as some of the brightest head to China
   and other parts of Asia. A blue card would at least make it clear to
   migrant professionals that they would be welcome. On the other hand,
   highly skilled workers go in search of dynamic economies, along with
   the high pay and bright careers they offer, and a blue card would do
   nothing to bring more dynamism to Europe.

   What of the less skilled? Mr Frattini points to a pilot project in
   Spain over the past two years in which Moroccans--especially
   women--have been brought in to do specific jobs on farms and in hotels
   for a few months at a time and then sent home again. Contracts are
   drawn up beforehand, travel is part-funded by the EU, everything is
   above board, and so far every migrant has gone back as agreed. As a
   result, 10,000 Moroccan workers did not have to run the risk of taking
   a patera across the Strait of Gibraltar. They were able to send
   remittances home but put no strain on Spain's public services. Mr
   Frattini wants to launch another pilot programme in his native Italy,
   where southern farmers might recruit workers from Egypt or Tunisia.
   Moldova and Ukraine want to get involved in similar schemes.

   A new kind of Gastarbeiter...

   If the projects work (one in Corsica was less successful), Mr Frattini
   would like to scale them up, with member countries eventually setting
   import quotas for foreign labour. The EU is planning to establish job
   centres in north Africa, beginning with one in Mali, to offer a legal
   route to jobs in Europe, and also provide some language training.

   But this part of what Mr Frattini and others call circular migration
   has been tried before and seems unlikely to bring the hoped-for
   benefits. Germany's Gastarbeiter scheme began in 1955, drawing workers
   first from southern Europe and north Africa and then Turkey. Something
   similar was done in France and the Netherlands, mostly with workers
   from north Africa. America imported Mexican farm labourers under its
   Bracero programme.

   The trouble is that such a dirigiste design is not well suited to
   today's liberal democracies and their flexible labour markets. And
   unless schemes are tightly regulated and the exit of workers is
   enforced by law, everybody has an interest in keeping the supposedly
   termporary workers in place. Employers would much prefer not to have
   to train new people every six months, and workers want to keep their
   jobs or move on to better ones. Many of the guest workers who arrived
   in northern Europe from Turkey and north Africa in the 1960s and 1970s
   never left, and eventually brought their families to live with them
   too. The old joke that there is nothing so permanent as a temporary
   migrant has more than a grain of truth in it.

   It might be possible to create financial incentives for migrants to
   leave at the end of their contract period. Co-operation between the
   governments of the host and the sending countries would be essential,
   says Mr Frattini. And migrants could be policed more tightly with the
   aid of new technology: ID cards, databases with biometric details,
   systems like E-verify in America that allow employers to check whether
   workers are authorised to be in the country. Proponents of circular
   migration admit that it would entail a loss of privacy.

   The biggest problem, though, is that people who expect to be packed
   off home after six months will be seen as second-class residents, and
   will have less incentive to integrate with their hosts. Why learn the
   language or adopt local habits and values for just a few months?
   Locals, for their part, are likely to view temporary labourers with
   the same sort of hostility as longer-term immigrants.

   When migration is made legal and easy, many migrants choose to go home
   after a year or two. Easily crossed borders allow people to become
   what some researchers call "pendulum migrants", those who split their
   year between two different countries. This is already a
   well-established habit in rich countries. Growing numbers of wealthy
   Germans, Britons or Nordics spend parts of the year somewhere sunny
   and then go home again. Perhaps more of this sort of movement could be
   encouraged, with rich countries offering workers multi-entry visas
   valid for several years at a time.

   Yet any sort of circular migration brings challenges of integration.
   Faster movements of people, combined with technology--cable television
   piping entertainment from the sending country, cheap phone and video
   calls back home--slow the rate at which migrants adopt their host
   country's language, values and identity. Migration, suggests Mr
   Moudden in Rabat, "is changing our whole understanding of citizenship,
   of the nation".

   In the past a third-generation migrant, for example in America, would
   have been expected to have shed much of his grandparents' identity.
   Academics reckoned that a second-generation migrant would be fluent in
   his host country's language but would use his mother tongue at home.
   By the third generation descendents of migrants had usually swapped to
   English alone. That pattern may be changing as migrants feel loyalty
   to more than one country. Moroccans in Europe, for example, even
   third- and fourth-generation ones, are encouraged by the government in
   Rabat to identify with the north African country. All are granted
   irrevocable Moroccan citizenship under the constitution, even as
   European countries, notably the Netherlands, are turning against the
   idea of their nationals holding dual citizenship. The incentives for
   Morocco are clear: it wants citizens abroad to remit funds, to invest
   back home and to support its political ambitions. "We look at how the
   Jews in America do it, how that community has the ability to maintain
   ties with Israel and be good Americans, that is how we want it," says
   Mr Moudden.

   ...and of citizenship

   The idea of dual identities may be unsettling for some--in France, for
   example, all citizens are considered French--but governments of
   sending countries increasingly want close ties with their émigrés.
   Hyphenated migrants like Italian-Americans and African-Americans may
   become more widespread in other countries too. As India, China,
   Ethiopia and others grow more intent on tapping their diaspora for
   remittances and other support, migrants, even several generations on,
   may come under greater pressure to retain some of their old identity.

   Conversely, the governments of receiving countries, especially in
   Europe, are doing far more to encourage migrants to absorb the values
   and habits of their host societies, giving up on an idea of
   multiculturalism that left ethnic groups free to preserve their
   languages and habits as they wished. In Britain a newly formed Justice
   Ministry is planning to draw up a statement of British values to which
   all residents might be expected to subscribe. In Britain, the
   Netherlands, Australia and many other countries, those applying for
   citizenship are expected to demonstrate their knowledge of their host
   society by passing an exam. France's Mr Sarkozy wants to inculcate
   French values into all French nationals.

   When France takes up the rotating presidency of the EU in 2008 Mr
   Sarkozy plans to launch a campaign for the promotion of "European
   values". More countries will push the idea of a "contract for
   citizenship", suggests Gregory Maniatis, a migration expert in New
   York, under which migrants will have to learn the language and way of
   life of their host country.

   These rival pressures on migrants' identity are likely to get stronger
   and more complex as patterns of migration change, with people moving
   greater distances and settling among different ethnic, religious and
   cultural groups. Danes in Sweden or Albanians in Greece have little
   trouble integrating into the relatively familiar societies next door.
   Even Poles in Ireland prosper, perhaps thanks to the incomers' good
   standard of education and skill and the shared Catholic faith. But
   Iraqis in Sweden, Somalis in Canada or Pakistanis in Norway typically
   find integration harder. Migrants who preserve--or even develop for
   the first time, perhaps as second-generation immigrants--a strong
   religious sense that cuts across any national loyalty may be the
   hardest of all to assimilate in broadly secular Western societies.

   The touchiest question these days is how best to help Muslims to
   integrate into Western countries. Providing a decent education,
   offering language training, enforcing anti-discrimination laws to
   ensure access to jobs and discouraging ghettos are all tried and
   trusted methods to help any migrant to feel more at home. The lesson
   from America, Britain and elsewhere is that the more highly skilled
   people settle in very quickly and that many of the lower-skilled also
   catch up eventually.

   But tackling an extremist minority, or its sympathisers, is quite
   another matter. Specific initiatives to encourage better co-operation
   with moderate Muslim countries such as Morocco, which are as worried
   as host countries in the West that their diaspora could become
   radicalised, may be worth trying. Deploying moderate imams and Muslim
   scholars to counter extremist propaganda within some Islamic migrant
   communities might also be helpful. Taking care that anti-terrorist
   efforts do not vilify Muslims in Western countries is self-evidently
   sensible.

   Yet it is worth remembering that over the years democracies on both
   sides of the Atlantic have managed to absorb large numbers of migrants
   from diverse backgrounds. Robert Putnam, an academic at Harvard, is
   worried that greater diversity in rich countries may mean a short-term
   decline in what he calls social capital--trust, co-operation, shared
   values--within those countries. He points to research in America
   showing that greater diversity--usually in areas with high rates of
   immigration--is often associated with more fear of crime and other
   social problems.

   But Mr Putnam also points to the experience of once divided
   institutions in America, such as the army, where people of different
   backgrounds, with some encouragement, have learned to integrate well.
   And he considers the example of immigrants who came to America a
   century ago, including those of different religious beliefs, such as
   Russian Jews and Polish Catholics, who went on to share social capital
   in the same way as anybody else.

   There is evidence that foreigners are still following that model. For
   example, a survey in America by the Pew Hispanic Centre shows that the
   vast majority (94%) of Hispanic adults in the country who were born of
   immigrant parents claim to be fluent English speakers. It may take a
   few decades for rich countries to integrate newcomers, but history
   suggests that it will happen before too long.

