
   The devil in the nuclear detail


   AFTER 15 years of trying, the effort to prise North Korea out of the
   bomb-making business has just got encouragingly technical. A team of
   experts, led by America, started work on November 5th to disable three
   of North Korea's nuclear facilities at Yongbyon: the reactor, the
   nearby plant that fabricates natural uranium into fuel for the reactor
   core and the chemical reprocessing plant where bomb-usable plutonium
   is separated from the spent fuel-rods. The work should be finished by
   year's end, when North Korea is also supposed to have made a clean
   breast of other nefarious nuclear activities. Then talks among the six
   countries involved--including South Korea, Japan, China and
   Russia--can turn to dismantling Yongbyon, and to North Korea's
   promised disarmament.

   But will North Korea really give up the estimated 50kg (110lbs) of
   separated plutonium (enough for at least 6-8 bombs) it is thought to
   have squirrelled away? By getting down, literally, to nuts and bolts
   at Yongbyon, the six-party process has got a crucial step further
   towards that disarmament goal than previous efforts. Under a 1994 deal
   with the Clinton administration, North Korea agreed merely to freeze
   operations at Yongbyon, while America, South Korea and Japan laboured
   to build two Western-designed, less proliferation-prone reactors as a
   huge bribe. The deal fell apart in 2002, when America confronted North
   Korea with evidence of its cheating: a parallel effort to produce
   enriched uranium, another possible bomb ingredient.

   At six-party talks in February, North Korea accepted the equivalent of
   1m tonnes of heavy fuel-oil (some of it in other forms of energy
   assistance) for disabling Yongbyon. Once disabled, says America's
   chief negotiator, it would take North Korea at least a year to get the
   plutonium-producing reactor up and running again.

   Of course, with the nuclear stash he already has, North Korea's Kim
   Jong Il might not be fussed at such a delay. And much could go wrong
   from here. One difficulty lies in the six-party complexities. But
   other problems already loom.

   It was a badly-behaving North Korea--in October 2006 it conducted a
   provocative bomb test--that persuaded the other five to back tough
   sanctions, helping the February deal to fruition. Now nuclear progress
   brings its own worries.

   South Korea is straining to push through economic and other deals with
   North Korea, fearing that a speedy rapprochement between prickly Mr
   Kim and America will reduce its own leverage over the North. America
   worries that such generosity could weaken Mr Kim's incentive to stay
   on the nuclear straight and narrow. Japan, meanwhile, is anxious that
   America, in pursuit of nuclear progress, will remove North Korea from
   its terrorism blacklist before Mr Kim has come up with information
   Japan wants about its citizens abducted to North Korea in the past. It
   refuses to stump up towards energy aid, but may contribute to the
   disabling costs.

   North Korea, though, still has to produce its list of weapons
   programmes (to include any uranium dabbling). A first draft is
   expected shortly. George Bush has said it must also include nuclear
   assistance Mr Kim has given to others. Some nuclear material was
   discovered in Libya several years ago of possible North Korean origin.
   And America and Israel reportedly think the list should also include
   Syria. An Israeli air raid in September is thought to have targeted a
   nuclear site--possibly a building to house a reactor--being built with
   North Korean assistance. Syria has bought missiles from North Korea,
   but both deny nuclear co-operation.

   There might be more. Before talk of a Syrian connection, an article in
   the March issue of Arms Control Today by Siegfried Hecker and William
   Liou listed the many ways North Korea's nuclear expertise could be of
   use to Iran, which also has suspect nuclear ambitions. Mr Kim
   co-operates closely with Iran on missile development, and most
   recently supplied it with nuclear-capable missiles able to fly 2,500km
   (1,150 miles). He has also helped it build secretive underground
   tunnels.

   A North Korean list devoid of all outside nuclear connections would be
   one damaging development; full disclosure could be another sort of
   bombshell.


   The politicians are still fighting the war of independence, 36 years
   on

                                                                      AFP
                                                                      AFP

                                   Nizami's youth comes back to haunt him


   THE army-backed interim government running Bangladesh since January
   has been struggling to bring corrupt politicians and businessmen to
   trial. Now it faces mounting pressure also to prosecute those involved
   in "war crimes" during the country's war of independence in 1971. In
   recent weeks, the big political parties--in a rare display of
   unity--have jointly demanded that the government ban "war criminals"
   from contesting the parliamentary election due late next year.

   In effect, this would transform the government's "minus-two"
   strategy--the removal from politics of Sheikh Hasina Wajed and Khaleda
   Zia, leaders of the two biggest political parties--into "minus three".
   Talk of war-crimes trials leads inexorably to one person, Motiur
   Rahman Nizami, leader of the third-largest party, Jamaat-e-Islami.
   Shahrier Kabir, the head of the Nirmul Committee, a group campaigning
   for the trial of the 1971 war criminals, says he has "no doubt" that
   the case against Mr Nizami and his associates would stand up in a
   court of law, and wants the government to set up a tribunal.

   Bangladesh became independent in December 1971, after a nine-month war
   that pitted Bengali-dominated East Pakistan against West Pakistan. The
   West's army, with its appeal to Islamic unity, had the support of many
   of East Pakistan's fundamentalist parties. The most extreme of these
   was the Jamaat-e-Islami, whose student wing became the main source of
   a pro-army paramilitary body called Al Badr, which was led by Mr
   Nizami. Its members are alleged, among other atrocities, to have
   abducted and murdered dozens of senior journalists and academics.

   Frequent calls for war-crimes trials have been ignored. This time,
   however, the unelected government's hand may be forced by the new
   unity among the big parties, and by support for the demands among
   parts of the army. The army may want only to clip Jamaat's wings and
   cleanse it of the taint of 1971. Many civilians, however, are
   motivated by distrust of religion-based politics.

   Time is running out. Many witnesses, and many of the accused, have
   died. The head of the interim administration, Fakhruddin Ahmed, has
   said that the government would welcome prosecutions initiated by
   private citizens. But citizens' groups insist that the state must act
   as prosecutor in crimes of such magnitude.

   So far, the interim government has not faced a serious political
   challenge. But election boycotts are a common tactic in Bangladesh,
   and could be used to put pressure on it--provided, of course, that its
   military backers decide to go ahead with the polls. Trials relating to
   crimes committed so long ago may seem irrelevant in a country facing
   so many immediate disasters. It is still reeling from Cyclone Sidr and
   devastating floods. But for those demanding trials, Bangladesh's very
   identity is at stake. Many agreed with Zafar Sobhan, a political
   commentator, when he wrote recently that the immunity enjoyed by
   Jamaat since 1971 is the country's "original sin", polluting the body
   politic far worse even than financial corruption. Is there another
   country, he asked, where those, like Jamaat, "who opposed the birth of
   a country or those who collaborated with its enemies" have been
   rehabilitated?


   A new government in the Marshall Islands may spell trouble for America
   
   FIFTY years have passed since America ended nuclear testing in the
   Marshall Islands. But its 52,500 people are still wrestling with the
   legacy. On January 7th they ditched the pro-American administration
   led by Kessai Note and elected instead a government backed by
   disgruntled chiefs and senators from the nuclear-affected atolls. The
   new leaders are unhappy with their nation's "Compact of Free
   Association" (CFA) with the United States. They want to press the
   claims of nuclear victims on the islands of Bikini, Rongelap, Utrik
   and Enewetak. They are also considering opening diplomatic relations
   with China.

   America has reason to worry. It retains important strategic interests
   on Kwajalein, the country's largest atoll. Test missiles fired from
   California as part of the "Star Wars II" missile-defence programme
   regularly plunge spectacularly onto the lagoon floor, to be retrieved
   for scientific analysis. When the CFA was renegotiated in 2003,
   America insisted on a separate agreement giving it continued access to
   its $4 billion missile-defence test site on Kwajalein until at least
   2066. For this, it agreed to pay $15m a year, rising to $18m after
   2014. It rejected pleas from local landowners for direct negotiations,
   insisting on talks only with Mr Note's government. The new compact is
   worth about $3.5 billion over its 20 years, and gives Marshall
   Islanders rights to work and live in America.

   The Kwajalein chiefs responded by forming their own political party,
   the Aelon Kein Ad (AKA), which this week defeated Mr Note's party.
   After a chaotic election, which the AKA claims was marked by severe
   irregularities, it gained 18 seats in the 33-member Nitijela
   (parliament), just enough to secure the presidency.

   The new president, Litokwa Tomeing, has said his country's links with
   Taiwan are not paying off and that he wants to switch diplomatic
   recognition to China. If he does--and Taiwan is lobbying hard and
   expensively to dissuade him--that may further unsettle America. When
   Kiribati, another country of sun-baked atolls and lagoons just to the
   south, had links with Beijing, it allowed the Chinese to build a
   satellite-tracking station on the island of Tarawa. When it switched
   to Taipei in 2003, the station was hastily removed, to American
   relief. America would be unlikely to tolerate a similar facility in a
   Chinese-allied Marshall Islands.

   America paid $270m in compensation to nuclear victims under the first
   phase of the CFA (1986-2001), insisting that was a full and final
   arrangement. The new government claims this was far too little to
   compensate for the ill-health, birth defects and deaths suffered, or
   to cover the costs of cleaning up the damaged islands. The 67 tests
   conducted in the northern Marshalls between 1946 and 1958 released
   radioactive iodine said to be 150 times worse than the contamination
   from the nuclear disaster at Chernobyl in 1986. The new foreign
   minister claims that rising temperatures have caused irradiated
   bunkers once thought safe to leak, and that impoverished islanders are
   exporting toxic metals from their poisoned atolls.

   The AKA-dominated government's position is nevertheless precarious.
   Unless it can force big concessions from the Americans, several
   wavering senators could well switch sides. But America may find it in
   its interests to show some flexibility. It might be much costlier to
   stand firm than to bend a little to the prevailing political winds.


   Pakistan's madrassas may be less of a problem than its mainstream
   schools


   THE "battle" for Pakistani minds is sometimes not a figurative one. A
   bloody clash erupted last month when security forces prevented
   pro-Taliban militants from recruiting pupils for jihad at a private
   secondary school in North-West Frontier Province (NWFP). General
   Pervez Musharraf, Pakistan's president, casts such incidents as part
   of a struggle between his "enlightened moderation" and obscurantist
   militants. But critics say General Musharraf is failing in one
   important arena. His five-year old plan to reform Pakistan's madrassas
   is "in shambles", according to a report last week by the International
   Crisis Group, a research and policy outfit.

   Pakistan's real educational battlefield, however, is less in its
   madrassas than in its rotten mainstream schools and universities. In
   the absence of a decent education, points out Javed Ashraf Qazi, the
   education minister, "illiterate masses become ready recruits for all
   sorts of unhealthy activities." Perhaps recognising this, America has
   not wasted a dime on madrassa reform. But it has pledged $256m for
   mainstream education between 2002 and 2007.

   Officially, 53% of Pakistanis are literate. Others say the figure is
   nearer 30%. Literacy, often defined as no more than the ability to
   write one's name, is as low as 3% among women in some rural areas.
   Pakistan has a rapidly ballooning population of 160m with over 85m
   people below the age of 19. The education system, left to atrophy for
   30 years, is crippled by every possible ill: crumbling classrooms,
   poor teaching materials, untrained and truant teachers and endemic
   corruption.

   It is not all grim. The government is taking education more seriously
   and pouring in more resources. In the province of Punjab, which has a
   population of 83.7m, the World Bank has ploughed $850m into
   educational reform. Over the past three years more than 1m children
   have been enrolled in Punjabi schools for the first time. The
   provincial government has introduced free textbooks, a $4 monthly
   stipend for girls, a teacher-training scheme and has cancelled token
   school fees. Like NWFP, Punjab has purged its textbooks of much
   pro-jihad and anti-Indian propaganda.

   But the good news ends there. Poorer provinces have been unable to
   cash in. Baluchistan, blighted by a low-level separatist insurgency,
   has been able to increase spending by only 20-30%. Across Pakistan as
   a whole, only 52% of primary-school-age pupils attend school. Of
   those, nearly one-third will drop out. Only 22% of girls above the age
   of ten complete primary schooling, compared with 47% of boys.

   Some 3,500 schools do not have a building; of those that do, 4,000 are
   classed as "dangerous"; 29,000 schools have no electricity; 14,000
   have no drinking water; 22,000 do not have a toilet; 4,000 consist of
   a single classroom; and fewer than 100 secondary schools have science
   labs. The quality of education is still poor, and the government is
   far off its target of providing universal primary education by 2015.

   The private sector, which accounts for 30% of primary and secondary
   education, fares little better. Private schools are mostly
   over-subscribed, poorly paid and staffed by badly trained teachers.
   Many "English-medium" schools, offering to bridge the social divide
   between the anglophone elite and the "masses", are a swindle. Pupils
   are instructed mainly in Urdu. Nevertheless, educationalists are
   concerned that the divide between schools is reinforcing the social
   chasm.

   To be fair, the government is seeking to combat these woes. It has
   pledged to boost spending on education from 2.5% of GDP to 4%. But
   similar promises were made last year. Already some 40% of the
   education budget is returned to the exchequer because of a lack of
   "capacity", or the failings of a cumbersome bureaucracy.

   Pakistan's higher education has received the most obvious boost of
   energy and money. A Higher Education Commission was created in 2002
   and is run by a distinguished hyperactive organic chemist,
   Atta-ur-Rahman. With an annual budget of $449m, Mr Rahman has sent
   hundreds of students abroad on scholarships, embarked on a
   university-building spree, published lists in newspapers of dubious
   degree-givers, hunted down plagiarists and introduced
   performance-related incentives to improve teaching quality and
   research. Respected academics, such as Abdul Hameed Nayyar, believe
   that the haste of some of the reforms has "actually degraded higher
   education". Even if that is unfair, the present flurry of educational
   enthusiasm may not make a lasting difference. Its chances remain
   hostage to Pakistan's chronic political instability.


   A change in technique for the world's busiest executioners?

   CHINA'S leaders love talking about all the indicators that show China
   leading the world. Whether it is growth rates, production figures or
   trade volumes, officials relish any chance to unleash a barrage of
   dazzling statistics. They are less gung-ho about another category
   where China leaves the world trailing: use of the death penalty.
   Indeed, the number of Chinese criminal executions remains a state
   secret.

                                                                      AFP
                                                                      AFP

                                                    The old-fashioned way

   Foreign human-rights groups make valiant efforts to scour local press
   reports and tally the sums, but reckon they hear about only a fraction
   of the cases. In 2006 Amnesty International, a human-rights lobbying
   group, counted 2,790 people sentenced to death in China and 1,010
   executed. Other groups put annual executions at 7,500 or more. Even
   per head, using low estimates, China probably outstrips every country
   but Singapore. It also has a greater number of capital offences than
   anywhere else: more than 60. These include murder and other violent
   crimes, but also smuggling, drug trafficking and many "economic
   crimes" such as bribe-taking, embezzlement and even tax evasion.

   This month it was revealed that China is planning a big change. The
   traditional method of execution--a single bullet to the back of the
   convict's head--is to be replaced by a lethal injection. Jiang
   Xingchang, of the Supreme People's Court, told the press this is
   because injections are considered "more humane". The option was first
   authorised experimentally in China in 1997 and has since been used in
   many cities, including Kunming, Wuhan, Chengdu and Shanghai. Mr Jiang
   did not provide a timetable for an end to death by gunshot, but said
   the newer method has been favourably received by "all quarters of
   society, including those sentenced to death and their families."

   Some foreign critics disapprove. A statement from Amnesty said China's
   expanded use of lethal injections "flies in the face" of international
   trends away from capital punishment--which this year have seen even
   dictatorial Uzbekistan abandon the death penalty. The statement also
   cited the well-documented flaws in China's shoddy legal system and
   argued that a switch to lethal injection would do nothing to solve
   such problems as the arbitrary enforcement of the law or the execution
   of innocents. Recent years have seen a handful of cases in which
   Chinese defendants who had been sentenced to death, or even executed,
   were later found innocent. Chinese and foreign legal experts agree
   that an important cause of this, which China could do much more to
   eradicate, is the common police practice of extracting confessions
   through torture.

   There is also cause to challenge claims that lethal injections are
   more humane. This week America's Supreme Court began hearing a case,
   brought by two condemned inmates in Kentucky, alleging that injections
   can cause agonising pain, and thereby violate a constitutional bar on
   "cruel and unusual" punishment.

   In any event, China's interest in treating criminals more humanely has
   limits. This month the chief justice, Xiao Yang, said China might one
   day like to abolish capital punishment altogether. But that day would
   not dawn soon, because Chinese people believe strongly in the notion
   of an "eye for an eye and a life for a life". Not to mention tax
   evasion, of course.

   rights reserved.

   IFRAME:
   [4]http://switch.atdmt.com/iaction/oy6ats_EconomistcomLandingPage_1

   [activity;src=1245986;type=econo981;cat=e09as761;ord=1?]

   IFRAME:
   [5]http://ad.n2434.doubleclick.net/activity;src=1113415;type=2ndli341;
   cat=world756;ord=1;num=1?

References

   1. http://ad.doubleclick.net/jump/main.economist.com/printer;pos=1;sect=world;sect=p_top;sect=d_top;sect=world_p_top;sect=world_d_top;sz=468x60;tile=1;dcopt=ist;ord=54135762?
   2. http://www.economist.com/index.cfm
   3. http://www.economist.com/background/displayBackground.cfm?story_id=9249711
   4. http://switch.atdmt.com/iaction/oy6ats_EconomistcomLandingPage_1
   5. http://ad.n2434.doubleclick.net/activity;src=1113415;type=2ndli341;cat=world756;ord=1;num=1?

                                                                       AP

                                     AP

   Organised by text messages and internet chats, China's middle classes
   are daring to protest, and giving the government a fright


   INFORMATION technology in China is once again making political waves.
   In the tropical seaport of Xiamen citizens still talk excitedly about
   how an anonymous text message on their mobile phones last month
   prompted them to join one of the biggest middle-class protests of
   recent years. And in Beijing politicians are scrambling to calm an
   uproar fuelled by an online petition against slave labour in brick
   kilns.

   Chinese officials have had reason to worry before about the rallying
   power of the internet and mobile phones. Two years ago they helped
   activists organise protests against Japan in several Chinese cities.
   But the government, at least initially, sympathised with those
   protests. By contrast the demonstrations in Xiamen were directed at
   officialdom, and the slave-labour scandal embarrasses the government.
   It involves allegations that officials ignored kiln-owners' use of
   abducted boys to perform dangerous work. This has triggered a heated
   online debate about the political flaws that allowed such horrors to
   happen.

   The text message in Xiamen, circulated in late May, called for a rally
   outside the city government's headquarters on June 1st to protest
   against plans to build a huge chemical factory on a site, pictured
   above, in the suburbs. It compared building the $1.4 billion plant for
   making paraxylene, used in polyester, to dropping an "atomic bomb" on
   Xiamen. It warned readers that the factory could cause leukaemia and
   birth deformities among the city's 2.3m residents and their offspring
   (hence the choice of June 1st, children's day in China).

   The response was remarkable. Xiamen has a thriving economy and little
   history of protest. Yet many thousands of people rallied and marched,
   even though it was Friday, a working day, and as usual hot and humid.
   They came mostly from China's fast-growing middle class, a group the
   Communist Party usually regards as a dependable bulwark of support. In
   many Chinese cities there have been small-scale middle-class protests
   over issues related to property rights. But they are rarely directed
   at city governments.

   Even more remarkable is that the protest occurred in the face of clear
   government disapproval. Civil servants were warned they might be
   punished for taking part. Government offices even required their
   employees to keep working on the weekend of June 2nd and 3rd to
   prevent them taking to the streets. On May 30th the government
   appeared to make a big concession by announcing a suspension of the
   project pending a further environmental review. But the protest went
   ahead two days later anyway. At one point some people shouted slogans
   calling on the city's party chief, He Lifeng, to resign, but the
   demonstration was peaceful. Thousands marched again on June 2nd.

   The text message seemed to touch a raw nerve. Public confidence in the
   city leadership had been damaged by a proposal submitted to China's
   parliament in March by senior academics that the Taiwanese-owned
   paraxylene plant be moved further away from residential areas.
   Previously, say residents, the Xiamen government had given no
   indication that paraxylene might be hazardous. Criticism of the
   project began to flourish on local internet chat forums and blogs.
   Many complained that the plant would further ruin a once pleasant
   seaside city already threatened by smog and polluted seawater.

   The protests in Xiamen must be worrying to officials in Beijing. Urban
   environments have been deteriorating across the country. If tolerance
   for this among the middle classes were to crumble, unrest could
   spread. Ominously, from the party's perspective, hundreds of Beijing
   residents rallied outside the offices of the State Environmental
   Protection Administration (SEPA) on June 5th. Their complaint was
   about plans to build a waste incinerator in the north-west of the
   city, which they said could spread toxic chemicals. Two days later
   SEPA called for a further investigation of the incinerator project as
   well as of Xiamen's urban development plans.

   Chinese leaders have been similarly quick to respond to the torrent of
   online protest--and even some stiff criticism by the state-owned
   press--provoked by the reports of slave labour in the provinces of
   Shanxi in the north, and Henan, to its south. A petition posted on
   June 7th by fathers of abducted boys on [4]Tianya, a popular internet
   discussion forum, spread rapidly. Official newspapers soon picked up
   the story, describing the brutal conditions in which the labourers
   were held captive and the indifference of local police. Within eight
   days China's leading politicians were reported to have stepped in.
   Hundreds of "slaves" were declared to have been freed and many of
   their bosses arrested.

   In Xiamen, having made their last-minute concession, officials are now
   trying to track down behind-the-scenes organisers of the protests
   (some residents believe property developers, worried about the impact
   of the project on prices, encouraged people to take part). Notices
   have been put up in residential buildings calling on protesters to
   surrender themselves to police. But such tactics inspire far less fear
   than they did in the wake of the Tiananmen Square protests of 1989.
   Some residents say they now want a referendum on the project. A
   professor at Xiamen University says that if the project's opponents
   win, a new "environmental consciousness" will spread to other Chinese
   cities.

   For all their pro-green rhetoric, China's leaders would abhor this.
   They remain deeply wary of environmental groups, fearful that if given
   a free rein they could rapidly mobilise middle-class opinion against
   government policies. Nick Young of China Development Brief, a
   newsletter, says that these concerns increased in the wake of
   democratic revolutions early this decade in several former Soviet
   states. Although they eased a bit last year, Mr Young thinks the
   government will remain cautious. Xiamen has only one officially
   registered non-governmental environmental group. It has kept itself
   nervously aloof from the paraxylene-plant campaign. In Xiamen as
   elsewhere, it is China's online civil society that is leading the
   charge.


   Government and opposition limber up for March's presidential poll


   WITH the new year, election season has arrived in Taiwan.
   Parliamentary and presidential elections loom in the next three
   months. As always, the government in Beijing will be watching keenly.
   The first contest, on January 12th, is for Taiwan's legislature. The
   opposition Nationalist Party, the Kuomintang (KMT), which favours
   better relations with the mainland, is expected to retain its
   majority.

   The KMT hopes a decisive victory will give it momentum for the big
   prize, the presidency, to be decided on March 22nd. Ousted in 2000
   after five decades in power, the KMT is desperate to win it back. Its
   hopes were raised on December 28th when a court rejected an appeal
   against the acquittal on corruption charges of Ma Ying-jeou, the
   party's former chairman. This cleared him to contest the presidency.

   The ruling Democratic Progressive Party (DPP), on the other hand, is
   planning to use its expected defeat to argue against a concentration
   of power in KMT hands. Its presidential candidate, Frank Hsieh, will
   remind voters of the authoritarianism that marked KMT rule in the 20th
   century.

   Turnout may be no more than 60%, low by Taiwan's standards. Years of
   political mudslinging between the big parties have brought
   disillusionment and apathy. And unfamiliarity with a new electoral
   system may also deter voters. Taiwan has adopted a "single-seat, dual
   vote" system similar to those used in Japan and Germany. Voters will
   choose one direct representative per constituency and a preferred
   party to provide "at-large" members of parliament. There are 113
   seats, of which 73 are directly elected, 34 at-large and six reserved
   for aboriginal candidates. The KMT is expected to win 60-65 seats, the
   DPP 35-45.

   In 2005 the constitution was amended to halve the size of the
   legislature. The idea was to make it less chaotic and prone to
   fisticuffs. But the new rules are likely to result in a body stacked
   with local powerbrokers who care little about national policy.
   Intending to break the two-party dominance of Taiwan's
   rough-and-tumble political system, Lee Teng-hui, a former president,
   has urged voters to opt for minority parties. He even hopes the
   emergence of a third force in local politics could produce another
   presidential candidate.

                                                                      AFP

                                    AFP

                  Read her nails: Ma Ying-jeou is innocent

   The legislative-election campaign has been dominated by two issues.
   One is the DPP's drive to expunge from Taiwan symbols of Chiang
   Kai-shek, the KMT leader, who led its retreat from mainland China in
   1949. This week, the Chiang Kai-shek memorial hall in Taipei reopened
   as a "democracy memorial", highlighting the human-rights abuses of his
   regime.

   Second is a procedural dispute over two referendums to be held with
   the election. One, initiated by the DPP, relates to the KMT's "stolen
   assets". The other, introduced by the KMT, which this week
   nevertheless called a boycott of both referendums, covers alleged
   corruption by the DPP and President Chen Shui-bian.

   More important for the DPP than the issues themselves is the chance to
   settle procedures for yet another referendum, to be held at the same
   time as the presidential election. It will ask whether Taiwan should
   apply for membership of the United Nations using the name "Taiwan"
   rather than its antiquated formal title, "the Republic of China". This
   appeals to the DPP's core supporters, who see themselves as Taiwanese,
   not Chinese. So it is a device both to win votes and raise turnout.
   But it alarms China, which sees it as a step towards a formal
   declaration of Taiwan's independence--an event China has said could
   provoke an invasion. So China, as usual, will be rooting for the KMT.
   In Taiwan, that is not an advantage.


   Huddled masses, yearning to be free and going to China


   AT FIRST glance, Yunnan would seem the sort of place a pious Muslim
   should avoid. AIDS is rampant in this province in south-western China
   and Beijing's efforts have failed to curb the drugs and prostitution
   that spread the disease. Moreover China has an appalling record of
   suppressing religious freedom, including that of Muslims. In its
   western region of Xinjiang some have taken up arms.

   Yet Muslims from neighbouring Myanmar flock to Yunnan. In cities such
   as Jinghong and Liuku, they sell Burmese gems in shops decorated with
   Arabic calligraphy and pictures of Mecca. A jeweller in Jinghong, who
   has lived here for six years, says that in Myanmar "the Buddhists
   fight us Muslims and don't let us work. The government is very evil.
   Here in China you can work in peace."

   No one knows how many Burmese live in Yunnan. Many enter illegally.
   Official statistics suggest that Muslims make up about 4% of Myanmar's
   population of around 47m, but that is almost certainly an
   underestimate. The ruling junta has a history of discrimination
   against Muslims, particularly the Rohingya ethnic group, more than
   250,000 of whom fled from Arakan province into neighbouring Bangladesh
   in the early 1990s.

   Mosques and schools in Myanmar are shut down arbitrarily. Many Muslims
   find their movements restricted unless they pay hefty bribes; others
   languish in detention after officially instigated clashes with
   Buddhists. It does not help that their political sympathies often lie
   with the democratic opposition, whose leader, Aung San Suu Kyi,
   remains in detention.

   In China, in contrast, the Burmese find that, as long as they make no
   trouble, their faith is immaterial. Compared with other countries of
   refuge, such as Bangladesh, China offers relative stability. Even
   America is not as enticing a prospect. The jeweller frets that, as a
   Muslim, he would risk jail there. Business in China is booming, too;
   jewellers can make as much as 30,000 yuan ($3,900) per month.

   The local population gives them a mixed reception. The
   Hui--ethnic-Chinese Muslims many of whom have family in Myanmar--are
   friendly to their co-religionists. Burmese men here boast of taking
   Hui mistresses and wives. But Yunnan, like much of China, remains
   plagued by vast income inequality; the wealthy jewellers live beside
   subsistence farmers. Some resent the better-educated, wealthier
   Burmese immigrants. Undercurrents of racism do exist, as do reports of
   Burmese trafficking guns and drugs.

   If the resentment flares into violence, many Chinese Hui might side
   with the Burmese. As heroin and AIDS have already shown, Myanmar's
   internal affairs are not just internal. Despite this, China helps prop
   up its repellent regime even as it offers some of its victims
   sanctuary.

   rights reserved.

   IFRAME:
   [4]http://switch.atdmt.com/iaction/oy6ats_EconomistcomLandingPage_1

   [activity;src=1245986;type=econo981;cat=e09as761;ord=1?]

   IFRAME:
   [5]http://ad.n2434.doubleclick.net/activity;src=1113415;type=2ndli341;
   cat=world756;ord=1;num=1?

References

   1. http://ad.doubleclick.net/jump/main.economist.com/printer;pos=1;sect=world;sect=p_top;sect=d_top;sect=world_p_top;sect=world_d_top;sz=468x60;tile=1;dcopt=ist;ord=74383494?
   2. http://www.economist.com/index.cfm
   3. http://www.economist.com/background/displayBackground.cfm?story_id=10240370
   4. http://switch.atdmt.com/iaction/oy6ats_EconomistcomLandingPage_1
   5. http://ad.n2434.doubleclick.net/activity;src=1113415;type=2ndli341;cat=world756;ord=1;num=1?

   A shortage of officer material is another sign of India's talent
   deficit

   A FULL-PAGE advertisement ran in many English-language newspapers in
   India on January 15th for the "Harbingers of Peace and Stability"--the
   country's 1.1m soldiers. The occasion, Army Day, is an annual
   celebration of the world's second-biggest regular force. Yet the army
   now has a particular need of publicity: in a country of over 1 billion
   people, it needs more officers. Harbingers of the right stuff are
   proving hard to find.

                                                                  Reuters

                                  Reuters

                          ...but not enough chiefs

   The army is short of 11,000 officers, almost a quarter of the total
   muster. Worse threatens. The shortage is most acute in the lower
   ranks, and the Indian Military Academy in Dehradun, a school for
   officer cadets, can currently fill only 86 of its 250 places. The army
   is also losing some of the officers that it now has: over 3,000 have
   applied for early retirement in the past three years. This week the
   army chief, General Deepak Kapoor, suggested that the government might
   one day have to introduce conscription.

   The general blamed the shortage of officer material, from which the
   navy and air force are suffering to lesser degrees, on India's zinging
   economy. Graduate hirelings of the country's trendiest
   computer-services companies can sometimes earn twice a junior
   officer's monthly salary of 20,000 rupees ($500). Moreover, the army
   has for decades been tangled up in nasty insurgencies in Kashmir and
   north-eastern India. And it has been hurt by a series of scandals,
   some involving corrupt top brass, others suicidal soldiers.

   To improve matters, the army is banking on a generous pay rise this
   year; it wants junior officers' salaries to be doubled. This would at
   least improve its bid for India's small pool of well-educated
   graduates. But, given soaring wage inflation in private firms, which
   are also struggling to hire the talent they need, it would not fix the
   problem.

   That will require a bigger talent pool. After all, there is no
   shortage of young Indians who want an army career--or indeed, given
   persistent high unemployment, any sort of career. The problem is that
   only a privileged minority of school- and college-leavers can pass the
   army's entrance exams for officer training. In order to match India's
   rise to global importance, the army needs many things: more money,
   better technology and a coherent foreign policy on which to build its
   doctrine. Above all, however, like all India, it needs more decent
   schools.


   The war is brought home to Kabul's well-protected foreigners

   THE [3]website for the Serena Hotel in Kabul used to describe it as
   "an oasis of luxury in a war-ravaged city". Afghanistan's only
   five-star hotel is also a virtual fortress, surrounded by blast
   barriers, metal detectors, multiple reinforced gates and heavily armed
   guards. They proved inadequate defences against a four-man Taliban
   suicide squad that blasted its way into the lobby and then the hotel's
   spa on January 14th, killing eight staff and guests. Among those left
   cowering in the basement as American commandos hunted the bombers was
   Norway's foreign minister, Jonas Gahr Stoere, who had been holding a
   meeting in a place seen as secure.

   The 140 suicide attacks in Afghanistan in 2007 were almost all aimed
   at Western or Afghan security forces. This was the first by the
   Taliban to make Kabul's expatriates a direct target. So far they have
   remained oddly cocooned from the violence in the south of the country,
   which took some 6,500 lives last year. Foreigners can still walk
   around Kabul with only modest caution. There are restaurants, bars and
   even brothels catering to the several thousand expatriates: mainly
   aid-workers, diplomats and security contractors.

   The use of a suicide squad recalled the tactics of Pakistani jihadist
   organisations. The Afghan security forces were quick to accuse a
   Pakistan-based Taliban commander, Sirajuddin Haqqani, of plotting the
   attack. After the Serena bombing, a Taliban spokesman threatened
   similar violence against Western restaurants. All of this has sent a
   chill through Kabul's foreign residents. But this is still not
   Baghdad. Few of Kabul's inhabitants support the Taliban or want to see
   Western troops or aid agencies leave. There are 20,000 Western and
   Afghan troops defending the city.

   Before the attack there had been explicit security warnings. In the
   hours afterwards Afghan forces reportedly arrested many of the
   suicide-bombers' support team. The strength of the Taliban in the
   provinces close to Kabul does appear to be growing. But, backed by
   Western intelligence agencies, Kabul's security services seem to be
   growing more effective.

   However, the fear remains that if bombers started killing large
   numbers of expatriates they might force the withdrawal of some Western
   aid agencies and perhaps even the UN. That would be bad news for the
   international reconstruction effort, and worse still for the Afghan
   people.


   Rivalries between caste and ethnic groups threaten the peace process


   IN THE benign view of many Nepalis, their country's 100 or so ethnic
   and caste groups have co-existed for centuries in remarkable peace and
   harmony. A new crop of ethnically-based groups, however, see things
   very differently. For them, the history of Nepal is one of remarkably
   successful and sustained discrimination. As the country of 28m people
   edges towards a solution to ten years of Maoist insurgency, these
   ancient cracks are being exposed.

   Since the beginning of the year, a succession of previously
   little-known organisations have vied to bring Nepal to a standstill.
   First came the Madhesi movement, some half a dozen competing groups
   claiming to represent Nepalis from the southern plains, known as the
   Terai. At least 30 people died in three weeks of violent protests,
   mostly shot by the police.

   In Janakpur, one of the worst affected areas, locals are angry, but
   sense historic change in the offing. A radio producer compares the
   mood to that of being weighed down by a boulder on the head and unable
   to stand up. "Then she throws it off. That's the Madhesi movement."

   Next to take to the streets was the Nepal Federation of Indigenous
   Nationalities, claiming to represent various peoples from the
   Himalayan foothills, which began its own series of crippling strikes.
   Several other ethnic identities have been invoked and the noise is
   likely to grow.

   These groups want an end to domination by the two highest Hindu
   castes--Brahmins (the priestly caste) and Chhetris (warriors), who
   make up about 28% of the population. These castes have controlled the
   country since it was unified in the 18th century. Power has often
   changed hands between them, and seems to be doing so again. Street
   protests last April toppled an essentially Chhetri royal government.
   Now, a coalition government of Brahmin-dominated political parties is
   negotiating with Maoist rebels, who have exploited caste and ethnic
   grievances, but are themselves largely led by Brahmins.

   Peace hinges on elections, due in June, to an assembly set up to write
   a new constitution. There is much talk of creating a "new Nepal". Yet
   many groups fear the Maoists will simply slip in at the top of the
   existing power structure while other interests are ignored again. A
   piece of ethnic propaganda shows two images of the Maoist leader,
   known as Prachanda. In one he eats beef--a taboo for Hindus--like an
   atheist rebel. In the next he drinks cow urine, like an orthodox
   Brahmin.

   The various ethnic groups present similar, though vague, demands for
   proportional representation in the elections and an ethnic-federalist
   structure in the new constitution. The government and the Maoists have
   conceded both demands, though equally vaguely. Meanwhile promised
   negotiations with the agitators have not materialised. Doubting the
   government's sincerity, the ethnic groups are continuing their strikes
   and protests.

   The benefits of federalism and proportional representation are widely
   recognised, but hard to deliver. According to Krishna Khanal of
   Kathmandu's Tribhuvan University, Nepal's ethnic and caste groups are
   so many and so scattered that among the dozen or so states a federal
   Nepal might include it is only possible to create three with a clear
   identity.

   Lok Raj Baral, a political scientist, says that in a system of
   proportional representation some of the Brahmin politicians on whom
   the parties depend must lose out. But the agitators hold some
   important advantages--especially the Madhesis, who live in an
   economically important area and control supply routes to the capital.

   There can be no election until their grievances, and those of others,
   have been tackled. Already it seems certain that the June deadline for
   the poll will be missed, undermining the peace process. The
   uncertainty gives greater influence to minor players, such as the
   Madhesi separatist guerrilla leader known as Jwala Singh, who is at
   present in hiding. Like many of the new breed, Mr Singh is a former
   Maoist. He accuses his former comrades of not taking a clear stand on
   Madhesi rights. Mr Singh has the armed strength to scare people and
   order killings but, in an interview, he implied that he would drop his
   separatist demands in exchange for recognition and a seat at the
   table. Two other violent Madhesi groups have recently emerged. They,
   too, seem to see a chance to spoil the peace process or wring
   concessions from the government.

   The biggest losers from the rise of ethnic politics are the Maoists.
   They have seen ethnic supporters who backed them during the conflict
   drift away as they draw closer to national power. They have responded
   by attacking their Madhesi rivals.

   In daily thuggery the Maoists show that, ceasefire or not, they still
   rely on violence. They have set the example for the new batch of
   politicians. That makes it even harder to achieve a feat not tried
   since 1999, but essential if Nepal is to move on from the bloody
   decline of the past ten years: holding elections that are both
   peaceful and inclusive.


   Electoral humiliation marks the end of the Chen Shui-bian era 

                                                                       AP

                                     AP


   CHEN SHUI-BIAN, Taiwan's president, called it the worst defeat in the
   history of his Democratic Progressive Party (DPP). After eight years
   of Mr Chen's lacklustre rule, it was routed in the legislative
   election on January 12th. The opposition Nationalist party, the
   Kuomintang (KMT), which wants much closer ties with China, is girding
   itself to return to power.

   Having won more than 70% of the parliamentary seats, the KMT hopes its
   candidate, Ma Ying-jeou, will stroll to victory in the presidential
   poll on March 22nd. Under Mr Ma, the KMT--which ruled all of China
   until it fled the Communists to take refuge in Taiwan in
   1949--predicts rapid improvements in relations with China: regular
   direct flights between Taiwan and the mainland (non-existent since
   1949); many more Chinese tourists; and fewer investment barriers
   between the two sides.

   But Mr Ma cannot rest easy. As they announced their victory in the
   legislative polls, he and his colleagues did not look jubilant. The
   DPP's share of the seats had fallen from nearly 40% to under a
   quarter. The Taiwan Solidarity Union, whose support had helped it
   control about 45% of the seats in 2004, was wiped out. Yet the DPP's
   share of the vote, 38%, was much the same; and turnout, at under 60%,
   was low. The DPP believes many of its voters stayed at home. They
   could still, despite what the polls say, tip the balance in favour of
   the DPP's presidential candidate, Frank Hsieh.

   Mr Hsieh must be feeling a little happier now that he has taken over
   the chairmanship of the DPP from Mr Chen, who stepped down to atone
   for the defeat. (He will relinquish the presidency in May, on reaching
   the two-term limit.) Mr Chen had tried in vain to rally support for
   the DPP by playing up Taiwan's separateness from China. Mr Hsieh is
   more loth to provoke the Chinese and shares the KMT's desire for
   closer economic ties. He will want to distance himself from Mr Chen,
   some of whose family members and aides have been dogged by allegations
   of corruption.

   The economy will be a big issue in the presidential poll. Taiwan's GDP
   has been growing at 4-5% annually for the past three years.
   Unemployment has stayed at around 4% and inflation last year averaged
   below 2%. But despite these respectable figures, many in Taiwan
   believe the economy would do better still if opened further to China.
   The DPP's fears of a "hollowing out" of Taiwanese manufacturing as the
   island's industries move to the mainland have failed to materialise.

   The DPP administration has tried some opening up. In the face of
   China's bar on direct contact with Taiwan's government, it has allowed
   negotiations between quasi-private bodies from the two sides, aimed at
   allowing 1,000 mainland tourists a day to visit the island without
   having to pass through a third country, as Taiwan now requires. At
   present only a couple of hundred Chinese tourists come each day.
   Agreement has been held up by bickering over whether such tourism
   should be described as between countries. China apparently believes
   that it would be easier to deal with Mr Ma, who wants 3,000 a day.

   Taiwan's hoteliers and shopkeepers, mindful of how big-spending
   Chinese tourists have helped Hong Kong's economy, are anxious for a
   breakthrough. In the central city of Taichung, the mayor, Jason Hu of
   the KMT, says three five-star hotels have been built in the past two
   years to prepare for the Chinese influx. With no sign yet of its
   arrival, the hotels are suffering. Despite the KMT's own
   stand-offishness towards China until the 1990s, Mr Hu unabashedly
   blames the DPP.

   The KMT's supporters say that if their party held both the presidency
   and the legislature, it would end the deadlock of Mr Chen's rule,
   during which the KMT and its allies have controlled enough seats to
   block DPP legislation. The KMT's plans are ambitious. It says it will
   boost GDP growth to at least 6% a year, with the help of more than $80
   billion in government spending over the next eight years on a variety
   of big projects ranging from sewage-treatment plants to
   public-transport projects. Vincent Siew, a former prime minister and
   Mr Ma's running-mate, says the party may even revive plans--vigorously
   opposed by the DPP--to expand the country's nuclear-power capacity.

   The KMT's ideas for dealing with China are no less ambitious. Mr Siew
   says a cap on investment in China by any Taiwanese company--of 40% of
   its net worth--would be lifted. Direct Chinese investment in Taiwan
   would be allowed for the first time. Su Chi, a KMT legislator, says an
   agreement with China on direct scheduled flights and cross-strait
   shipping would be reached within a year.

   Mr Ma has said that as president he would not enter talks with China
   about reunification. But if China removed the hundreds of missiles it
   has pointed at Taiwan, he would discuss a peace agreement. Last
   October China's president, Hu Jintao, also called for a peace accord,
   but on "the condition of the one-China principle". That is, Taiwan
   would have to accept it is in effect part of the People's Republic.
   Even the KMT balks at that.


                                                                       AP

                                     AP

   Amid a worrying surge in Islamic militancy, a fight between rival
   radicals may not be the good news Pakistan says it is


   IN PAKISTAN, more alarmingly even than usual, the flag of jihad is
   fluttering and extremists are marching on the state. Of several
   concurrent--partly co-ordinated--dramas involving Islamist militants,
   the bloodiest is in South Waziristan, a semi-autonomous tribal region
   on Pakistan's north-western frontier. In three weeks of high-altitude
   battle there between local Taliban and foreign--mostly
   Uzbek--Islamists, more than 250 foreigners are reported to have been
   killed. The army, which has failed to clear the foreigners from South
   Waziristan in four years of trying, announced on April 9th that the
   Talibs had done so. Yet quite why this fight began, whether it has
   ended, and what it means for Pakistan and the broader "war on terror"
   all remain unclear.

   A less obscure struggle was launched in Islamabad on April 6th by a
   mullah named Abdul Aziz. He gave the government a month to close the
   capital's brothels and music shops, and tear down advertisements
   depicting women. He also declared sharia law within the high walls of
   his mosque and the adjoining madrassa. If the government were to
   respond with force, he promised it suicide-bombings. After hearing
   this sermon, Mr Aziz's followers, allegedly more than 10,000 bearded
   males and burqa-clad females, set fire in the street to a pyre of
   music videos and CDs extracted from local traders. The mosque, Lal
   Masjid, on the roof of which these young zealots can be seen
   practising martial moves with staves, is barely a mile from Pakistan's
   supreme court, parliament building and the headquarters of the
   Inter-Services Intelligence Agency (ISI).

   For much of Pakistan's history, the ISI, the army's main spying
   outfit, has mobilised Islamists to fight its wars, in Afghanistan,
   Kashmir and elsewhere. This was consistent with a broader policy,
   pursued by successive--especially military--governments, of pandering
   to Islamists. Because it had made common cause with the fanatics, the
   army thought it could control them. If this were ever true, it is not
   now.

   On March 29th a suicide-bomber killed one soldier and mutilated
   several others in an army compound in Kharian, 160km (100 miles)
   south-east of Islamabad. Two days earlier, five ISI officers were
   killed in a grenade attack in Bajaur, another of the seven tribal
   agencies (see map). The suicide blast was the eighth this year,
   including two in Islamabad, and all, says a senior intelligence
   official, were linked to militants in Waziristan.

   The violence comes at a bad time for General Pervez Musharraf,
   Pakistan's uniformed president. Over the past month, he has faced
   rowdy strikes and protests from the country's black-coated lawyers,
   over a crude attempt to sack the country's top judge--an attempt,
   allege his opponents, to make sure any constitutional shenanigans
   escape judicial censure. In an election year these civilian opponents,
   whom the general has outwitted for a decade, scent blood. Two exiled
   leaders, Benazir Bhutto and Nawaz Sharif, are rallying their followers
   to the lawyers' protests. In all the fuss, sectarian bloodletting last
   week in Kurram, another tribal agency, barely merited a mention in the
   nation's press. Only 40 Sunnis and Shias were reported killed.

   Not much more attention--in Pakistan at least--was paid to one of the
   first judgments of Mr Aziz's new sharia court--a fatwa issued on April
   8th calling for the sacking and punishment of the tourism minister,
   Nilofar Bakhtiar. Her alleged crime was to have received an elated hug
   (a restrained pat on the back, she says) from a French paraglider
   after the pair completed a glide together in Paris. Besides promoting
   Pakistan as an ideal tourist destination, Ms Bakhtiar's stunt was
   supposed to draw attention to the plight of children orphaned by the
   earthquake in Kashmir and North-West Frontier Province (NWFP) in
   October 2005. Many, incidentally, are reported to have been taken in
   by madrassas such as Mr Aziz's.

   Amid all this distressing news, the government is striving to present
   the fighting in South Waziristan as something positive. It describes
   it as local tribes recoiling against al-Qaeda-type militants in their
   midst. There may be some truth in this. But it is hard to celebrate a
   war that appears to have cemented the authority of a Taliban militia,
   modelled on Mullah Omar's Afghan original--over a swathe of the
   strategic border region, from which its fighters launch attacks on
   American and NATO troops in neighbouring Afghanistan.

   At the least, the fighting may signal a definitive end to the army's
   own effort to purge the foreign militants. It has deployed 80,000
   troops to the tribal areas, of whom some 700 have been killed. Seen
   locally as an invading army, this has inspired fanatical resistance,
   undermined the civil administration in Waziristan, and helped spread
   Taliban rule outside the tribal areas and into the NWFP itself. In the
   districts of Tank and Bannu, police posts have been abandoned and
   barbers sent packing. In another district, Malakand, a militant leader
   named Fazalullah, the son-in-law of a chieftain who sent thousands to
   Afghanistan to fight for the Taliban against America and its allies in
   2001, is reported to be wandering on horseback, delivering Taliban
   edicts through a megaphone.

   The army advanced into the tribal areas--for the first time in
   Pakistan's history--soon after America's 2001 invasion of Afghanistan.
   Coming the other way, thousands of Taliban and the foreign jihadists
   they had sheltered fled the superpower's bombs. It was a natural
   sanctuary. The Taliban were mostly Pushtuns, an ethnic group
   straddling the border, and included many Pakistanis, mostly from the
   tribal areas, and of these especially Wazirs.

   This was partly a result of the ISI's support for the Taliban, and its
   ability to manipulate the Wazirs, who, with a predilection for jihad
   and a history of raiding Afghanistan, were not unwilling tools.
   Indeed, the pitiful deprivation of the tribal areas left them few
   better options.

   Pakistan's normal writ does not extend to these areas; neither do its
   benefits. They are governed according to a British colonial model by a
   powerful bureaucrat called the political agent, who reports to the
   president. Acting through local elders, called maliks, the agent's
   single main charge is to keep the tribes in check. To that end, he can
   levy harsh collective punishments, such as demolishing houses or
   imprisoning women and children. Wazirs call these powers the "black
   laws". Interestingly, liberal Pakistanis refer to a raft of laws that
   discriminate against women and non-Muslims, introduced by General Zia
   ul-Haq, a former military dictator, Islamist and American ally, by the
   same name.

   In the wilderness

   So long as they do not upset the political agent, the tribes have been
   left to rule themselves--through jirgas, tribal councils, or, when
   they feel threatened and their jihadist blood is up, sharia courts.
   They are probably the most neglected Pakistanis. Waziristan has one
   hospital bed per 6,000 inhabitants, and a literacy rate of around 10%.
   More than 80% of males are educated in madrassas and girls not at all.
   Since 1997, residents of the tribal areas have been permitted to vote,
   but political parties may not campaign among them. Small wonder if
   they feel ambivalent towards Pakistan.

   The tribal areas were also a second home for foreign militants. Many,
   including Osama bin Laden, learned their trade there during the
   anti-Soviet jihad in the 1980s. Anecdotes suggest that 300 al-Qaeda
   fighters, mostly Arabs, survived the group's last stand at Tora Bora,
   on the Afghan side of the border, and fled into Kurram. About 130 were
   swiftly arrested. Of the remainder--often called "core
   al-Qaeda"--there has been little sign. A handful of mid-rankers has
   been picked off by the Pakistanis, including a couple in or around the
   tribal areas. Last year, when Abu Musab al-Zarqawi, boss of al-Qaeda's
   franchise in Iraq, was killed, a document retrieved from his hideout
   suggested the group's leaders were in Waziristan. But since 2001
   surprisingly few Arab jihadists have been encountered, willingly or
   otherwise, by Western soldiers in Afghanistan or by the Pakistanis
   next door.

   The foreigners fighting in Waziristan are mostly Uzbeks, mainly from a
   hapless militant group, the Islamic Movement of Uzbekistan, which was
   chased into Afghanistan in the late 1990s. Among them is said to be a
   handful of Uighurs from Xinjiang in China and Chechens--allegedly
   including the staff of the Chechen embassy to Afghanistan under the
   Taliban. A few members of this job lot of jihadists, estimated at
   between 800 and 5,000 fighters, are reported to have been settled in
   Waziristan since the 1980s. Others have come since 2001, according to
   a Pakistani intelligence official, who claims to have interviewed a
   woman trafficked from Uzbekistan to become a jihadist's wife.

   As the army fought its way into first South, then North, Waziristan in
   2003-05, the Uzbeks allied with the Wazir and Mahsud tribes against
   it. The alliance was forged principally by a charismatic Wazir
   commander, Nek Muhammad, a veteran of battles against the Soviet
   forces and with the Taliban against their Afghan enemies. A
   long-haired, wild-eyed warrior, a type common in Wazir history, Nek
   Muhammad was killed by the army in 2004. It had signed a treaty with
   him shortly before, in effect giving his Pakistani Taliban the run of
   South Waziristan. Nek Muhammad's five senior commanders and one or two
   rivals have since been jostling for command, executing criminals and
   launching attacks into Afghanistan.

   The latest fighting involving the Uzbeks is in part a product of this
   feuding. Two of the five commanders, who are all from the Wazir
   Yargulkhel tribe, have fought alongside the Uzbeks. They include Haji
   Omar, who until recently was considered Nek Muhammad's anointed
   successor. According to Brigadier Mahmood Shah, the army officer who
   drafted the deal with Nek Muhammad, Haji Omar's main weakness is a
   certain irascibility caused by a Soviet bullet lodged in his brain.
   This makes him a "wonky sort of chap". The rival side, including most
   of the Yargulkhel, is led by another Taliban commander named Muhammad
   Nazir. By kicking out the foreigners, Mr Nazir plainly hopes to emerge
   as Nek Muhammad's unrivalled successor.

   It would not be surprising if, as the government claims, Mr Nazir's
   campaign is popular. Wazirs are a xenophobic and conservative bunch.
   They are scandalised by some of their Uzbek guests, who drink alcohol,
   poach women, survive on banditry and are said to be loth to wage jihad
   in Afghanistan. The Uzbeks are also accused of the murder of 180
   maliks in South Waziristan, which was the final blow for the local
   administration.

   Talib v Talib

   To fight the Uzbeks, Mr Nazir has received support, allegedly
   including airstrikes and artillery, from the army. There are some
   indications that his alleged victory augurs well. For example, several
   top-level Afghan Taliban, including a son of Jalaluddin Haqqani, a
   noted outlaw, are reported to have tried and failed to arrange a truce
   in South Waziristan. But it is also possible that America, which
   covers the cost of Pakistan's operations in the tribal areas, has in
   fact been paying for Mr Nazir's Taliban to kill Uzbek militants
   because of their reluctance to kill American troops.

   If that were true, Pakistan would not mind unduly. Its priority is to
   wrest back a sort of control over the tribal areas. To that end, after
   the failure of its military operations, the government has in fact
   made several deals with the militants in a vain effort to buy their
   obedience. A pact in North Waziristan last September produced a
   similar result to that with Nek Muhammad. The militants rarely attack
   Pakistani troops there, partly because they are too busy pouring into
   Afghanistan. In February America's then top general in Afghanistan,
   Karl Eikenberry, claimed that cross-border attacks had risen threefold
   since that deal.

   The fighting between Mr Nazir and the Uzbeks might suggest that
   Pakistan has abandoned such mollifying tactics in favour of
   time-honoured divide-and-rule. That would bring short-term gains, at
   best. It will not roll back the Taliban. That vast task will probably
   require massive economic development of the tribal areas and their
   incorporation into the regular Pakistani state. Indeed this has always
   been official policy. But, as so often in Pakistan, it has been
   blocked by vested interests: the army, which saw the tribal areas as
   its adventurist playground; elite bureaucrats, who coveted appointment
   as political agents, sometimes allegedly as a chance to make corrupt
   fortunes from taxing smugglers; and the mullahs, who are said to
   control more than 3,000 madrassas in the NWFP, well financed by Gulf
   countries.

   In the absence of competition from the secular political parties,
   Islamic parties clean up the local vote in the tribal area. Typically,
   the government's chief negotiator with Mr Nazir is Fazlur Rahman, the
   Islamist leader of the parliamentary opposition. As so often, the
   general seems torn between unleashing reforms and falling prisoner to
   the vested interests. His instincts are for reform. Programmes to
   bring better health care and education to the tribal areas are already
   under way--America has contributed $38m to these since 2002 and
   promises more. Last year, moreover, a committee of Pushtun
   grandees--retired civil servants, judges and so forth--was told to
   find out what the tribals wanted. After holding jirgas across the
   tribal areas, these wise men reported that they wanted the black laws
   repealed, gradual recourse to the laws of the state and the same
   freedoms as other Pakistanis. For these sensible proposals General
   Musharraf has yet to show any enthusiasm.


   Everybody claims a breakthrough with North Korea. This sounds familiar


   BRINGING his own food, and accompanied by 300 business, political and
   cultural figures--but excluding the international press--President Roh
   Moo-hyun of South Korea drove to Pyongyang on October 2nd to call upon
   North Korea's Kim Jong Il. At the heavily-armed border, which Bill
   Clinton once described as "the world's scariest place", Mr Roh got out
   of his limousine to cross on foot--a step, he wanted everyone to know,
   that symbolised a desire for peace and reconciliation between the two
   estranged sides of a bloody civil war that remains unresolved more
   than 50 years after it ground to a halt.

                                                                      EPA
                                                                      EPA

                                             The end of the line for Kim?

   It was only the second-ever meeting between leaders of the two
   countries, and Mr Roh's gambit was aimed at the history books. He
   wanted to salvage an ineffectual presidency, which ends in December,
   by asking Mr Kim to reduce tensions on the peninsula in return for
   economy-transforming aid and investment. Mr Roh's approach has led to
   divisions even among his own advisers. Some, such as the unification
   minister, Lee Jae-joung--described by one Western diplomat as an
   "unguided missile"--are gung-ho for reconciliation and are prepared to
   overlook a lot of Mr Kim's unpleasantness.

   Others despise the repressive regime of Mr Kim, and know that behind
   him lies a trail of broken promises. To offer too much now might also
   undermine the multilateral "six-party" process taking place in
   parallel, in which North Korea is being offered measured aid in return
   for clear steps towards dismantling its nuclear capabilities.

   Though this summit drew the opaque Mr Kim out from the shadows
   somewhat, he remains hard to read. During the first summit, in 2000,
   when he met Mr Roh's predecessor, Kim Dae-jung, Mr Kim was all
   bear-hugs and smiles. That meeting generated mass euphoria in North
   and South, but little of substance came of it--not even Mr Kim's
   promised return visit to Seoul. It later turned out that $500m had
   been paid to Mr Kim just for the audience.

   This week the befuddled looks of farmers as Mr Roh's presidential
   cavalcade swept up the highway to Pyongyang suggested that Mr Kim had
   not let all his compatriots in on the historic moment, one for which
   Mr Roh has begged for years. Though a handpicked crowd in the capital
   gave a joyous reception, waving artificial bunches of Kimjongilia, a
   strain of begonia that is a national flower, Mr Kim himself was stiff
   and tight-lipped. To many of his countrymen, he will have looked on
   television like an emperor receiving tribute. But many outsiders once
   again wondered about the health of the pallid, pot-bellied
   65-year-old. Mr Kim is known to have had heart problems, and some
   intelligence analysts recently have claimed to see the early signs of
   senile dementia--though this is mere conjecture.

   From what can be gleaned of their substance, talks between the two
   leaders on October 3rd only emphasised the distance still to travel.
   Mr Kim may be willing to squeeze the outside world for aid--but on his
   terms. So Mr Roh's offer of what amounted to a Marshall Plan to
   transform North Korea's economy in pursuit of Chinese-style
   liberalisation met with blank dismissal. Mr Kim does not even like a
   showcase industrial park at Kaesong, where South Korean manufacturers
   employ cheap North Korean labour, to be described as a model of
   successful "reform". Once again, Mr Kim showed how he puts his own
   survival over that of the North Koreans he brutalises.

   Yet a joint agreement was announced on October 4th, something Mr Roh
   will be able to take home with relief. Gone were his hopes for great
   involvement in the North, but there was agreement to allow freight
   trains into Kaesong. There was a recommitment to help families divided
   by the civil war to meet (though a word from Mr Kim is all it would
   take to solve that sad problem). Talks will be sought with America and
   China to put a formal end to the civil war (though peace on the
   peninsula, these countries are likely to argue, can only come after
   its denuclearisation). Steps were promised (as, fruitlessly, they were
   at the 2000 summit) to reduce military tensions: defence ministers
   would meet, while a disputed western maritime area would see its
   fisheries jointly mined.

   Promising as all this sounds, much of it merely repeats earlier
   promises. In the long run, Mr Kim has never really seen his interests
   as best served by closer relations with the South. They might lead,
   eventually, to reunification and hence to his dynasty's extinction.
   China, Japan, Russia and America, the other parties in the six-party
   talks, may loathe his regime, but they are in effect helping to prop
   it up.

   Peace dividend

   As Mr Roh struggled to secure his piece of paper in Pyongyang, the
   Chinese government this week declared a breakthrough in those talks as
   well. Almost a year after North Korea exploded a nuclear bomb, the
   Chinese said the country had agreed to disable its main nuclear
   reactor and reprocessing plant at Yongbyon by the year's end (this,
   the main source of the North's bomb-grade plutonium, has been shut
   since July). North Korea has also promised to give a full account of
   all its nuclear activities by then. If it sticks to this pledge--and
   American-led inspection teams are to oversee the disablement,
   starting, said negotiators, as early as this month--then the North
   will get about $100m in aid. Meanwhile, America says it will drop the
   North from its list of states that sponsor terrorism, a central North
   Korean demand.

   In Washington, DC, the administration hailed the pact, which had
   George Bush's personal nod, as a real step on the path to a
   nuclear-free Korean peninsula. Others remain sceptical until the fine
   print is known. And no one doubts that the next stage after
   declaration and disablement--getting North Korea to give up its
   handful of nuclear weapons along with its stock of fissile
   material--will prove by far the hardest. For now, Mr Kim is being
   given the benefit of the doubt. Not for the first time, he may turn a
   profit from that. Perhaps the brutalised country he has done so much
   to impoverish might even benefit too.


   For Muslims and other minorities, the monks' battle was not their
   fight


   IN THE streets surrounding the Sule Paya pagoda in downtown Yangon,
   Burmese Muslims ply their trade, selling sweetmeats, calligraphy or
   spectacles. When the military junta opened fire on protesters led by
   monks in September, the Muslims had an excellent view of the violence.
   But for all the expletives they threw at the government, many
   refrained from joining the protesters. "It's a Burmese problem," says
   a grizzled old man, lolling outside the mosque opposite the pagoda.
   "Let them deal with it. They don't think of us as being of their
   country." The sense of being apart from Myanmar is an example of the
   religious and ethnic divisions that will persist, even if military
   rule eventually gives way to democracy.

   The complexities of national identity are starkest in Sittwe, the
   capital of Rakhine (formerly Arakan) state in western Myanmar,
   bordering Bangladesh. Sittwe's Muslims, who form anywhere from a third
   to half of the local population (official estimates of Muslim numbers
   are notoriously unreliable), are a mixed lot. Some claim descent from
   Indian and Bengali immigrants, who arrived in the once-thriving port
   when Burma was still a place where fortunes could be made. Others
   belong to the Rakhine ethnic group. Still others claim a distinct
   Rohingya ethnicity (a designation the junta does not recognise). But
   on one point, all agree: the government, being Buddhist, discriminates
   against Muslims. "The infidels are cruel to us and beat us," goes a
   common refrain.

   Severe poverty--the sight of ten people living under a single roof
   without electricity is as common as that of forced labour on the roads
   along the marshy sea--exacerbates Muslim resentment, particularly
   given the false but intractable belief that Myanmar's Buddhists are
   getting rich. Although incidents of outright violence have decreased,
   relations between Muslims and Buddhists remain tense. Some Muslims
   take satisfaction from the government's crackdown on the monks. "They
   [the junta] put them on a pedestal and now they're the ones having a
   problem," grins one local imam. Amongst Sittwe's Muslims, the
   otherwise universal admiration for Aung San Suu Kyi, the leader of the
   opposition, is tempered. "She can't help being an improvement on the
   current government," says the imam. "But she's Buddhist too. She's
   probably not very good on the Muslim question."

   Religion is not the only source of division. Race plays a powerful
   role. Sittwe's Muslims, like its rarer Hindus, find it almost
   impossible to travel outside Rakhine state. Even inside it, paperwork
   and perpetual inspections can make a simple fishing trip harrowing.
   Most attribute these restrictions to the government's belief that
   Rakhine is plagued by illegal immigrants from India and Bangladesh who
   do not deserve citizenship or the right to travel.

   Such oversimplifications miss the demographic complexities of Sittwe.
   Some residents are Indians who were born there. Others are products of
   mixed marriages. Many have family members in other parts of Myanmar
   whom they might never see again. "There have been Muslims here since
   before the British ever came to Burma," says a local teacher. "And
   yes, a lot of the people here did come over from Bangladesh. But that
   was years and years ago." Small wonder that most of Sittwe's people
   nowadays just want to leave. "I'd go to Malaysia or even Bangladesh,"
   says a young man who was born of a Bengali father and Rakhine mother.
   "But I don't have the money."

   Though it is most potent amongst Muslims, the idea of not belonging is
   common among other ethnic and religious minorities. Sittwe's Hindus
   also say they are locked out of the labour market. Buddhists in
   Rakhine often identify themselves as belonging "Not [to] Myanmar, but
   the Arakan kings" (a reference to the ancient Rakhine empire). Forging
   a single national identity from these disparate ethnic and religious
   groups will be a challenge for any Burmese government. Already,
   disunity may have harmed the prospects for democratic change. "Where
   were the ethnic armies?" asked one resident of Yangon, plaintively, of
   the uprising against the junta in September. "If the Shan and Kachin
   had come, we might have got somewhere." Perhaps, like the Rakhine and
   Muslims, they felt it was not their fight.


   A boom in panda production is good for both bears and business 

                                                             Imaginechina

                                Imaginechina

   LU LU paces up and down in a small concrete enclosure, showing no
   interest in a video he can see just outside his pen. He may have been
   excited by the panda pornography the first time he watched it, but he
   certainly isn't now. It probably doesn't help that the soundtrack is
   malfunctioning. Pandas like the noise and smell of sex much more than
   the images.

   Still, Lu Lu's keepers at the panda research centre at Wolong in
   Sichuan province, set among misty mountains covered in bamboo,
   rhododendrons and fir trees, believe that adult panda movies may have
   helped the conception of his daughter, Ying Ying, last year. One of a
   pair given by the Chinese leadership to celebrate the 10th anniversary
   of Hong Kong's handover from Britain to the communist mainland, she is
   now a star attraction at a theme park in the territory, and a symbol
   of new hope for China's panda population.

   China's record of protecting its rare species has been desultory. In
   the world's first extinction of a large vertebrate for half a century,
   the Yangzi river dolphin was recently declared to have been wiped out
   (notwithstanding a reported sighting in August 2007). The South China
   tiger is close to disappearing in the wild (official claims in October
   of the first wild sighting in more than 30 years have been widely
   derided in China as false).

   Pandas might have expected to get better treatment. With their winning
   combination of scarcity and cuddliness, they are a national symbol, a
   powerful instrument of foreign policy and a potent brand. Empress Wu
   of the Tang dynasty gave pandas to Japan in the 7th century. Mao
   Zedong's gift of Ling Ling and Hsing Hsing to President Richard Nixon
   in 1972 broke the ice between the two cold war rivals and gave birth
   to the term "panda diplomacy".

   Yet in the 1980s there were fears of imminent extinction, and much
   debate about why. At first many said the panda was an evolutionary
   dead end: it had bad genes and was hopeless at sex. If that was the
   case, protecting it was going to be tough. But increasingly scientists
   have put the blame on people, who exacerbated a problem caused by the
   life-cycle of the high altitude bamboo that is the panda's staple
   diet. In the 1980s, it burst into flower and died, as it does every 30
   to 80 years; but human activity had deprived the pandas of access to
   lower altitude species that would once have served as a back-up.

   Since then, China has begun to tackle the problems of both wild and
   captive populations. The captive panda breeding programme has
   undergone a remarkable transformation. Long-held beliefs about the
   animal's reproductive capacities have been shattered. No longer are
   desperate keepers feeding Viagra to underperforming males (that did
   not work anyway). Researchers have given up ideas of cloning them.
   Good old-fashioned sex is now doing the trick, accounting for some 80%
   of births at Wolong. That's thanks to better habitats (larger areas
   help), better nutrition (more fresh bamboo) and new techniques for
   assessing when the female is in heat (only three or four days a year).

   In 2006 Wolong had 17 cubs and Chengdu, capital of Sichuan and
   location of the other main panda-breeding centre, had 12--record crops
   for both institutions. As a result, a new problem has emerged:
   overcrowding. Wolong's new-born panda cubs lie in rows in bassinets,
   as in a maternity hospital. Last year some of the younger pandas fell
   sick, possibly because disease spreads easily between animals in close
   proximity. Wolong officials say all recovered. But the China Daily, a
   state-controlled newspaper, quoted an unnamed expert as saying that
   two died after a disease outbreak this year. Wolong is building new
   quarters farther away to scatter the captives more widely. It aims to
   keep births to around a dozen a year.

   Life for wild pandas has been improving too, partly by accident. In
   1998 floods along the Yangzi left thousands of people dead and
   millions homeless. Logging, which deprives river banks of
   water-absorbing tree cover, was blamed for exacerbating the disaster.
   The government banned tree-felling across a wide area, including much
   of the pandas' habitat.

   Counting wild panda numbers is a difficult and controversial science,
   relying on estimates based on examination of droppings. The third and
   latest government survey, conducted between 1999 and 2003, put the
   population at 1,596. This was up from 1,114 in 1988 but was still
   short of the 2,459 pandas counted a decade earlier.

   Given improvements in survey methods, experts warn against drawing
   firm conclusions from comparisons of the three sets of results. Many
   believe, however, that numbers in the wild are on the rise. Hu Jingchu
   of China West Normal University says there may be more than 2,000 now.
   Some researchers believe there may be considerably more. In 2006
   Chinese and British scientists led by Michael Bruford of Cardiff
   University and Wei Fuwen of the Chinese Academy of Sciences published
   research on droppings found at Wanglang reserve in Sichuan. They
   concluded that there were 66 pandas living in that area, more than
   twice as many as the 2003 census suggested, implying a total wild
   panda population of 2,500-3,000.

   Panda branding

   Flush with pandas, Wolong is now experimenting with ways of releasing
   them into the wild. A male was set free in 2006. It was injured,
   apparently by another panda, re-released, and later found dead.
   Experts believe it fell off a tree during a fight. Another panda is
   likely to be released in the coming year, this time a female (thought
   less likely to get into trouble). The hope is that pandas can be
   released into small isolated wild populations that are in danger of
   being weakened by in-breeding.

   In another eight to ten years, says Li Desheng of the Wolong reserve,
   China should have around 300 captive pandas of sufficient genetic
   diversity to ensure the indefinite survival of the species (there are
   now about 220). Efforts are now being made to identify the genetic
   make-up of the captives to ensure the best possible mating matches.
   Artificial insemination will still sometimes be necessary, but better
   and safer ways of doing this are being developed. The process normally
   involves the use of general anaesthetic, which is risky. Hong Kong's
   Ocean Park is working on a technique for training males to provide
   semen samples while wide awake.

   More pandas do not bring down the price for foreign zoos, though,
   because China controls the supply. Since the height of the bamboo
   crisis in 1984, China has ceased handing out pandas free as a gesture
   of friendship to other countries. Western zoos now have to pay $1m per
   pair annually (plus another $600,000 if a cub is born) to keep them on
   what is normally a 10-year loan. Favoured countries may get better
   deals. Thailand's Chiang Mai Zoo is an exception, having secured a
   pair in 2003 for $250,000 a year, to the chagrin of its Western
   counterparts.

   The money is still very useful. The number of panda reserves has
   increased to more than 60 from 13 in the early 1990s, with the area
   covered roughly tripling from 6,000 sq km in the same period. Hiring
   and training staff, replanting forest and bamboo and moving farmers
   away from panda habitats is costly. So too is breeding and looking
   after the captive population.

   Sichuan province is increasingly keen to cash in on its
   black-and-white gold dust and has plans to tighten its hold over the
   brand (two other provinces, Shaanxi and Gansu, also have wild pandas,
   but considerably fewer). In 2006 the Sichuan Panda Strategic Planning
   Office was established. The provincial legislature adopted a five year
   economic plan calling for a "panda brand strategy" aimed at boosting
   the revenues of Sichuan's leading companies. Draft measures are said
   to call for panda-branded goods and services to contribute 5% of
   Sichuan's GDP growth in 2010 and 15% by 2020. The idea is for these to
   use a common panda logo.

   Tourism will be the driving force. Having gained some respite thanks
   to better protection of reserves from loggers, farmers and hunters,
   pandas now face an onslaught from the country's fast-growing middle
   classes in search of new leisure destinations. To help tour buses, the
   winding narrow road up to Wolong is being widened and straightened
   (the boom of dynamite echoes up the gorge whose peaks are home to
   rarely seen wild pandas). Tourist numbers to Wolong are likely to rise
   from 60,000 to 180,000.

   The Wolong reserve has taken a 20% share in a local state-controlled
   tourism company; which raises questions of whether the pandas' and the
   tourism industry's interests are perfectly aligned. Experts disagree.
   Zhang Hemin, Wolong's director, argues that pandas are not as afraid
   of human beings as is generally believed. They have even been known,
   he says, to cross roads and wander into urban areas (though few of
   Wolong's panda experts have seen one in the wild). Others say human
   noises and smells scare pandas, even at a distance. The Sichuan
   government says it is promoting "eco-tourism", but Fan Zhiyong of WWF,
   a conservation group (and a big contributor to panda conservation in
   China), is sceptical. "I sometimes ask, what is eco-tourism? Nobody
   can give me good answers," he says.


   A vote to abolish the monarchy gives Nepal a better, but not certain,
   hope of peace

   IN CLEAR wintry light, shining on the snowy tops of the distant
   Himalayas, a few hundred Hindu ascetics and others gathered in a
   Kathmandu park on January 7th to protest against the impending
   abolition of Nepal's 240-year-old monarchy. It was consigned to
   oblivion on December 23rd, in an almost unanimous vote of the
   country's parliament. This was momentous--even if the vote left it for
   the next assembly, due to be elected in April, to confirm the
   sentence. Yet, apart from the one small protest, which ended after
   some gentle placard-waving, there has been no whisper of public
   demurral.

   One explanation for this docility is that most Nepalis agree with
   parliament. Few modern monarchs have blundered so royally as Nepal's
   incumbent, King Gyanendra, who seized absolute power in 2005 and was
   forced by mass protests to return it the following year. He is also
   popularly believed--without evidence--to have been involved in the
   murder of his brother, the previous king, in 2001. Many Nepalis seem
   ambivalent about kings in general; but almost all want to see the back
   of this one.

   There is, however, another, less positive, explanation for the public
   apathy about the monarchy's future. After a year of quarrelsome and
   ineffective government--including two cancelled elections--many
   Nepalis doubt that their leaders will deliver what they promise. The
   government of Girija Prasad Koirala, an octogenarian four-time prime
   minister, is charged above all with bringing a lasting end to a nasty
   decade-long civil war, for which elections are considered crucial.

   The looming poll, to produce an assembly that will rewrite Nepal's
   constitution, was last due in November. It was postponed when Maoists,
   one side in the inconclusive civil war, withdrew from the government.
   They reasonably feared electoral defeat. That would have been a
   demoralising blow for their cadres, including some 23,000 former
   combatants, languishing in makeshift camps under UN supervision. Late
   last year the Maoists rejoined the government. The abolition of the
   monarchy was part of their price. All eight political parties that
   form the interim government promised to begin campaigning for the
   election. According to Baburam Bhattarai, the Maoists' deputy leader,
   there is "no question" of another delay.

   Leaders of the other parties agree that further delay would be
   disastrous. Yet, in private, almost all expect it. First, they say,
   the Maoists are sure to back out again. They also point to insecurity
   in the southern Terai region, home to around 40% of Nepalis. In the
   past year, 130 people have been killed there in complicated and
   worsening ethnic and caste-based violence.

   Meanwhile, Nepalis--who are among Asia's poorest--are having a
   miserable time. Annual economic growth, of about 2%, is barely keeping
   pace with the population. In a war-enfeebled state, crime is
   everywhere on the rise. In Kathmandu, a haven from much of the misery,
   people feel especially disgruntled, because their protests brought
   this government to power. Further stagnation, many feel, could lead to
   another sudden change: an army takeover--perhaps disguised behind a
   civilian faade--may be the likeliest sort.

   Indeed, the monarchist army chief, General Rookmangud Katwal, this
   week struck a jarring note. Egged on by India, which fears a Maoist
   takeover above all, he declared that no former Maoist fighter would be
   allowed to join the army. Rather feebly, Mr Koirala seconded him--to
   the irritation of the Maoists, who want all of their cadres inducted
   into a new national army. They have a point: they voluntarily ended
   the war, while in control of much of Nepal. But, loth to return to the
   jungle, the Maoists might settle for much less: army posts for a few
   hundred former insurgents, perhaps, and jobs for the rest.

   In fact, there may be no big problem that the government could not
   settle. Tribal militiamen in the Terai might accept a more modest
   bribe. But to offer such compromises, strong leadership is needed. Mr
   Koirala, as he inhales from the oxygen tank that is keeping his ailing
   body alive, needs to ponder that.


                                                                    Panos

                                   Panos

   The residents of Dharavi, allegedly Asia's biggest slum, are thriving
   in hardship 

   AROUND 6am, the squealing of copulating rats--signalling a night-long
   verminous orgy on the rooftops of Dharavi, a slum in Mumbai--gives way
   to the more cheerful sound of chirruping sparrows. Through a small
   window in Shashikant ("Shashi") Kawale's rickety shack, daylight
   seeps. It reveals a curly black head outside. Further inspection shows
   that this is attached to a man's sleeping body, on a slim metal ledge,
   12 feet above the ground.

   With maybe a million residents, crammed into a square mile of low-rise
   wood, concrete and rusted iron, Dharavi is a squeeze. And in Shashi's
   family hutment--as slum-dwellings are known in Mumbai, where half the
   city's 14m people live in one--it feels like it. As the sparrows stir,
   so do the neighbours. Through the plank-thin walls of the tiny loft
   where Shashi, a jobbing cleric-cum-social-worker, lives above his
   parents, come the sounds of people bumping and bickering.

   On one side is a family of 12 living in a 90-square-foot room--about
   half the size of an American car-parking space. On the other, eight
   people share a similar area. Night-sounds suggest they include a man
   with a painful cough, a colicky baby and an amorous couple. At least
   they can squeeze inside, unlike the man roosting behind Shashi's
   hutment--and unlike Parapa Kawale, a 22-year-old friend and neighbour,
   who had dropped by the previous evening to share a spicy bean curry.

   Parapa, a semi-skilled electrician, lived with his parents, two
   brothers, their wives and two children in a room of 48 square feet. If
   half the family members slept on their sides, they could just about
   fit. But as the only single male, Parapa felt a dreadful gooseberry.
   Like Shashi, he is a member of the local branch of the Communist Party
   of India (Marxist), which tells Dharavi's youths not to marry unless
   they can support a family. Wretched nonetheless at the nightly
   coupling around him, Parapa began sleeping in the alley outside--and
   drinking heavily.

   A month ago, explained Parapa, a strapping, beaming, Chaucerian
   fellow, he chased one of his brothers and a wife from the hutment in a
   violent, drunken rage. They fled back to the remote village in
   southern Karnataka that the family emerged from three decades before.
   Parapa then fixed a man-sized plank to the hutment wall, so that while
   his father and brother made love to their wives below, he could stay
   chastely on the shelf. Still, he sometimes sleeps outside, beside an
   open sewer, in the blissful quietude of the street.

   During a four-day stay in Dharavi, as the guest of Shashi and his
   friends, your correspondent heard many such tales: of hard times,
   facing up and getting by. The narrators were sometimes bitter or
   suspicious, but mostly friendly, almost invariably courteous, and
   occasionally, like Parapa, very funny. If poverty can seem
   dehumanising from afar--especially in much reporting on it--up close
   Dharavi, which is allegedly Asia's biggest slum, is vibrantly and
   triumphantly alive.

   Soon after 6am, in the metre-wide street outside Shashi's hutment, an
   ugly morning ritual has begun. "It's my turn! My husband needs to get
   to work!" a woman shouts, in jostling over a water tap. In Shiva
   Shakti Nagar, a slum area of dalits (former "untouchables") from rural
   Maharashtra, there is a tap for every ten houses, or roughly 100
   people. "Push off! My kids are late for school!" another woman lashes
   back.

   All along the street, water is gushing into blue plastic tanks and
   aluminium tubs, washing sticky breakfast dishes clean. It flows down
   the street in a rippling sheet. Bisecting it is an open drain, which
   gushes torrentially, flushing away the detritus of the previous day.

   From the stink of this, it includes a lot of human excrement--which
   tiny naked children, squatting with their backsides jutting over the
   torrent, are busy adding to. In fact, it is not supposed to be used
   for this purpose. The locals are instead supposed to take their turn
   at a block of 16 public latrines, serving 300 hutments (or 3,000
   people). It costs a rupee a visit--or 30 rupees (75 cents) for a
   monthly family ticket.

   Outside the men's side of the block, a line of bleary-eyed dalits are
   silently waiting. Most are still dressed for bed, in cotton shawls and
   sarongs--for custom dictates that they purge before washing.
   Wordlessly, they usher this foreigner to the front of the queue. And
   he remembers words of welcome uttered by another Dharavi Marxist, Raju
   Korde: "A guest is from God, but I'm worried that you won't like our
   toilets." Happily, the Asian-style loos are as clean as they could
   possibly be.

   At 7am the early shift begins in Dharavi's 15,000 hutment factories.
   Typically, they consist of one or two jerry-built storeys, stuffed
   with boys and men sewing cotton, melting plastic, hammering iron and
   moulding clay. Indeed, it is for its industry, not its size, that
   Dharavi is most distinctive. The clothes, pots, toys and recycled
   materials its residents produce earn them millions of dollars in
   annual exports alone. As the sun climbs over Dharavi, a rising timpani
   of metal on metal, a whirring of small machinery, indicate that the
   working-day has begun.

   Ramesh Kadam is at his desk in the Peela Bangla (Yellow Bungalow)
   tannery company. One of the oldest in Dharavi, it occupies the same
   factory, beside a stinking black creek, that Mr Kadam's grandfather
   founded in 1918. The site was chosen for its proximity to the main
   slaughterhouse of Bombay, as Mumbai was called. Handling meat and
   tanning leather are considered unclean in Hinduism, so the factory was
   built out of sight, on an island, with villagers of the lowly Koli
   fishing caste mending their nets on its shore. Indeed, much of Dharavi
   was underwater at that time. And so it is today when the monsoon
   comes, flooding the slum with black creek water and sewage.

                                                                    Panos

                                   Panos

                    Shashikant Kawale, a courteous host

   As Bombay boomed, on the back of its port and textile mills, poor
   peasants flowed in from the land. During periodic famines--including
   one in Bengal in 1943 that killed 3m people--they came in spate.
   Dharavi is where these migrants claimed--or reclaimed--a plot.
   Shashi's parents were propelled from Karnataka by a drought, arriving
   in the city with five small children in 1976. "In the village we were
   starving," says his mother, Shantabai, creator of the tasty bean
   curry. "Here, we were poor, but we could eat."

   Mr Korde's parents, landless vagrants from central Maharashtra,
   trekked in around the same time. His father died recently of
   tuberculosis, after a career spent hefting sacks of lentils in a
   factory. His mother, Leelabaiy, a pugnacious 65-year-old jangling with
   green bangles, lives with Mr Korde and his wife and two children in a
   three-room slum-house. Unlike her husband, she had some schooling, and
   retains a slightly sophisticated air. Asked why she married down, she
   lifts up seven fingers--one for each of the elder sisters who had
   first to be found a husband and dowry.

   With this history, Dharavi's population is diverse. Tamils, Andhras,
   Assamese, Biharis, Bengalis and local Maharatis; all India's peoples
   are here. Perhaps a little over half belong to India's poorest groups:
   dalits and Muslims. They tend to live semi-ghettoised, as in Shiva
   Shakti Nagar, within the same language group. Indeed, the poorer
   Dharavi's residents are, the more caste-sensitive they are likely to
   be. Mr Kadam is a dhor, of the dalit tanning caste. Yet as his
   business thrived, his family became middle class, a powerful identity.
   Last year Mr Kadam exported 25,000 leather belts to Wal-Mart in
   America. He has moved his family from Dharavi to a smart suburb of
   Mumbai. Laughing proudly, he says his teenage son refuses to visit the
   ancestral factory, which he considers dirty.

   The four children of Venkatesh Dhobi, all aged ten years and under,
   cannot shun their ancestral pool of filth. They work every day in this
   well of brown water, beside a litter-strewn railway line. They pass
   unwashed clothes into the pool, where 20 adult dhobis--of the dalit
   washer caste--soak and scrub them. With an explosive grunt to keep
   rhythmic time--a sound not unlike that emitted by Japanese Noh theatre
   actors--together they thwack the heavy sopping clothes onto smooth
   stones. The children then strew them between the railway tracks to
   dry.

   They are the fifth generation of Dhobis to work at this pool. The
   first, says Mr Dhobi, was his great-grandmother, who arrived from
   Mehaboob Nagar, in Andhra Pradesh, a century ago. "For 100 years, we
   have served this city," says Mr Dhobi, a short 35-year-old with the
   torso of an underpants model. And yet their rural roots have survived.
   All the dhobis in the pool--which is called Dhobi Ghat--are from
   Mehaboob Nagar. Aged 14, Mr Dhobi was married there to a local girl.
   The big changes of the past century, in his view, seem to be that
   Dhobi Ghat has got much dirtier and people send fewer clothes to be
   washed in it. India's swelling middle class--people like Mr
   Kadam--prefer washing-machines. Together, Mr Dhobi, his wife and four
   children earn less than 200 rupees a day.

   Dharavi's diversity can be a problem. In 1992 communal rioting swept
   Bombay, sparking battles in the slum between Hindus and Muslims.
   Around 200 people were killed. But multi-culturalism is also a
   blessing. Unlike the city's more homogeneous shanties--including a
   rusty sprawl of 300,000 mostly Maharatis along the runways of the
   city's airport--Dharavi is too fractured, and massive, to be claimed
   as a vote-bank by any gangster-politician.

   But the slum has known gangsters. In the 1970s a godfather of the
   Bombay mafia, Vardarajan Mudaliyar, more or less ruled it. Using the
   slum's large Tamil community--his own--as a base, he ran moonshine and
   prostitution rackets. He also claimed ownership over thousands of
   illegal hutments, and extracted rents from their occupants. So did his
   gangster rivals. In those days, Dharavi was dangerous.

   It has become safer for two main reasons. One is that in 1976 the
   state government gave the slum-dwellers limited rights over their
   hutments. They were recognised as "identified encroachers", a status
   guaranteeing compensation in the event that the government bulldozed
   their shanties. In return, the government began collecting peppercorn
   rents--currently around 100 rupees a month for each hutment--on the
   encroached land. It also started supplying Dharavi with mains water
   and power, which the gangsters hitherto had stolen from the city and
   sold in the slum. This step put the slumlords out of business, and
   started a modest property boom. Today, tiny hutments in Dharavi are
   sold, without title, for 500,000 rupees.

   Not all Dharavi is benefiting. Rajiv Gandhi Nagar, a huddle of
   hutments behind Mr Kadam's tannery, still has almost no mains power or
   water. In a shack cut into a bank of rubbish, overlooking Mumbai's
   plush Bandra Kurla business district, Karnla Ishwar, an aged widow and
   day-labourer, describes the cost of this. She buys water by the bucket
   an arduous ten-minute walk away. She buys electricity, at 100 rupees
   per appliance per month (plus a 500-rupee deposit), from a neighbour.

   But Ms Ishwar is unlucky. With reliable power and water, many of
   Dharavi's residents have been able to start businesses inside the
   slum. In this they had a great advantage--the other main reason for
   the slum's rise. As Bombay expanded, so Dharavi became the heart of
   India's commercial capital. Indeed, in a city of notoriously rotten
   infrastructure, the slum is a transport hub. It is sandwiched between
   Mumbai's two main railway lines and ringed by six stations. In
   addition, Dharavi's hutment industrialists enjoy the competitive
   advantages of slum-life: cheap labour and an environment where
   government inspectors fear to tread.

   Mr Korde, a portly 40-year-old, has seized this opportunity. The son
   of an unlettered vagrant, he has a business degree from Mumbai
   University and several small companies: a mobile-phone shop, a
   printing business, also a share in a co-operative bank. He reckons to
   earn 25,000 rupees a month. A decade ago, he bought his slum-house, on
   the western edge of Dharavi, for 450,000 rupees. Its value has almost
   doubled. "I am a Marxist and also an entrepreneur," he says, a trifle
   defensively, in the nearby office of the Communist Party, seated
   beneath colourful portraits of Stalin, Lenin, Engels and Marx.

                                                                    Panos

                                   Panos

                     Venkatesh Dhobi, swamped with work

   An evening stroll through Dharavi with Mr Korde, a well-liked local,
   is inspiring. Think 19th-century boom-time Brooklyn. In
   fluorescent-strip-lit shops, in snatched exchanges in the pedestrian
   crush, as a hookah is passed around a tea-stall, again and again, the
   stories are the same. Everyone is working hard and everyone is moving
   up. All Mr Korde's friends--or their fathers--arrived in Dharavi much
   poorer than they are now. Most own at least one business. Some of
   these slum-dwellers employ several hundred people.

   Aftab Khan is typical. A tailor with a trim moustache, and scholarly
   wire-rimmed spectacles, he arrived from Uttar Pradesh (UP) 20 years
   ago, with little more than a needle. He now employs a dozen
   youths--all recruited in his native village--to turn out 150 items of
   children's clothing a day. In workhouse fashion, they eat and sleep
   where they labour, in the upper two floors of a hutment. Reachable
   only by a ladder and rope, this resembles nothing so much as a
   tree-house with sewing-machines. Yet for their drudgery, the
   apprentices earn 200 rupees a day--about four times a rural wage in
   UP.

   The evening is darkening. And beside a barrow heaped with bright
   orange vermicelli--a sticky fibre eaten during the Muslim festival of
   eid--Mr Korde introduces a local celebrity. He calls himself Raja
   Bhai, or King Brother. A handsome Bihari, and comic, Raja Bhai has in
   15 years built a garment business employing 200 people. His success is
   impressive. Yet it has left him exposed to the predators of the
   informal economy: rent-seeking officials. To protect himself, he is
   now launching a second career, in politics.

   In Dharavi, Raja Bhai is looking for a ticket with the Congress party,
   for the next municipal, or even state, election. Meanwhile he is
   campaigning for the Lok Jan Shakti party, a champion of low-caste
   Biharis, in his native state. Either way, he is sure he will soon get
   elected office--and with it the clout he will need to drive away the
   shake-down merchants.

   For thousands of men like these, Dharavi is a wonderful opportunity.
   But for millions of Mumbaikers, it represents a cost. Their city,
   South Asia's biggest, is choking. Its infrastructure is a crumbling
   disaster. And yet over the next decade, the UN says the population of
   Mumbai will almost double, making it the world's second-biggest city
   after Tokyo. Massive urban redevelopment is required--starting with
   Dharavi, at the city's heart. By one estimate, the slum's land alone
   represents $10 billion in dead capital.

   For a decade, the state government has tried coaxing the slum-dwellers
   to let it bulldoze their hutments and build high-rise apartments
   instead. Each dispossessed family is entitled to a flat of 225 square
   feet. After 30 years, they will be allowed to sell it. But only a few
   have accepted this offer. So now the government is trying to enforce
   it. In August it put the bulldozing and redevelopment of Dharavi, in
   six parcels, out to tender. The work was due to begin this year. But
   it has been stalled by bad press nationally and local protests,
   organised by Mr Korde.

   For small businessmen like him, the redevelopment plan is a nightmare.
   The slum's hutment factories, havens from tax and regulation, would be
   destroyed. In their place would be purpose-built workshops, for rent
   at commercial rates. "I will be finished," says Mr Khan, the scholarly
   looking tailor. For poorer residents, like Ms Ishwar, the widow living
   in rubbish-blown misery, the story would be different. Her new
   apartment, unlike her current hovel, would be fit for human
   habitation. If she, or rather her relatives, sold it, they would be
   rich. Either way, Mr Korde admits, the scheme will eventually happen.

                                                                  Eyevine

                                  Eyevine

                  Business is piling up for the recyclers

   So, these may be the last days for Dharavi. If so, much that is
   wretched will be lost. And, who knows, maybe something better will
   arise. Most of the slum-dwellers doubt this. And a few high-rise
   blocks, scattered across the slum, do not inspire great hope. Many are
   half-built and slowly mildewing. Lots of their residents, it is said,
   have already sold up illegally, and moved back to the slums, seeking
   things that town-planners cannot provide: a sense of history,
   community and freedom. Dharavi has these, as well as many horrible
   problems. It is organic and miraculously harmonious. It is intensely
   human. Unlike the random tower-blocks, Dharavi makes sense.

   It is 2am, and a violent drumming erupts outside Mr Korde's house.
   Booming in a six-beat rhythm, it ends in a crashing roll. This is
   repeated, again and again, rising as the drummers approach. The sound
   is thunderous. A few huge rats rush by the window, fleeing the noise
   like driven pheasants. And suddenly the drummers appear, parading
   through the slum, dragging on wheels a huge statue of Durga--a Hindu
   goddess, a multi-limbed and multi-coloured giantess, astride a tiger.

   On the drum-roll, the processors pause, and golden flares explode
   either side of the statue. In every doorway, along the alley,
   slum-dwellers are watching in silence. It is a thrilling and
   dream-like sight. This is apparently quite normal in Dharavi.


   Like father, like son


   IN JAPAN'S dynastic politics, even foreign policy is a family
   business. The most recent prime minister, Shinzo Abe, was the grandson
   of one prime minister; the incumbent, Yasuo Fukuda, is the first prime
   minister to follow his father's footsteps into office.

   The hawkish Mr Abe indulged in occasional revisionism over Japan's
   rapine wartime past and espoused a sweeping "arc of freedom and
   prosperity" that was supposed to anchor Japan in a Eurasian community
   of democratic nations but was in practice a not-particularly-subtle
   attempt to throw a cordon around a rising China. Though the arc
   languishes as official policy on the foreign ministry's [4]website, it
   has in practice been abandoned by Mr Abe's successor.

   Thirty years ago Mr Fukuda senior went to Manila and promised
   South-East Asia that Japan had forever renounced aggression against
   its neighbours, and would do everything to build confidence and mutual
   respect. This became known as the Fukuda doctrine. In the practice of
   it, Mr Fukuda pre opened diplomatic relations with China. Now, Mr
   Fukuda fils is proving a chip off the old block.

   Late last month at the 16-country East Asia Summit in Singapore, the
   younger Mr Fukuda looked singularly at ease schmoozing with Asia's
   leaders, most of whom say they value discretion over confrontation. In
   effect, he assured them that the Fukuda doctrine was alive and well.
   Though there is no question of Japan abandoning its 60-year alliance
   with the United States (and neighbours would no doubt be horrified if
   it did), Mr Fukuda assured them that he would follow a more
   "Asia-focused" policy.

   China, in particular, has taken notice. Its leaders have not forgotten
   the father, and the stripling 71-year-old son will get a warm welcome
   on a first official trip to Beijing in late December or early January.
   Where Mr Abe used bluntly to bring up China's human-rights record and
   its lack of military transparency, people who know Mr Fukuda say that
   there is no question of his raising such indelicate issues with the
   Chinese. As an early seasonal gift, his government last month refused
   to meet the Dalai Lama, who was on a visit to Japan, explaining that
   the Tibetan leader was not "important" enough.

   The upshot is that traditionally strained relations between Japan and
   China look set for a sharp improvement. President Hu Jintao will visit
   Japan in the spring, and is likely to be invited as a guest to the G8
   summit to be held in early July in Hokkaido, in northern Japan.
   Climate change will top the summit's agenda, and China's pollution
   record will draw flak, as will its human-rights record soon after,
   during Beijing's Olympics. Mr Hu will look to Mr Fukuda--if he is
   indeed still prime minister--to provide friendly covering fire on both
   counts. The last thing China wants to do in the coming months is
   undermine Japan's prime minister, and this will help Mr Fukuda, with a
   minimum of effort, to rise above his domestic problems and look every
   inch the statesman.


   Economic advance is not winning all that many hearts and minds

   IT WAS an odd remark to come from a Chinese government official.
   Instead of flaunting the 13.2% growth that his autonomous region
   reportedly achieved in 2006, he was openly contemptuous of the
   calculations: "The officials tell us what incomes Beijing wants us to
   report and then we just have to report those numbers, even though
   there are farmers earning far less." Worse, he has views on the limits
   of Chinese sovereignty. "Highest this in China, highest that in
   China," he says, in a caustic imitation of Chinese tour guides.
   "This," he declares, a hand sweeping out towards the mountain-circled
   horizon, "is not China. This is Tibet."

   He may work for the Chinese government, but he is an ethnic Tibetan
   and, like many others, he is intransigently opposed to all things
   Chinese. His motives in working for the party are purely mercenary:
   "It's the highest paying job I can get." He also admits that he would
   like to visit India to see the Dalai Lama, Tibet's exiled spiritual
   leader. But, for now, he must earn money.

   His is a common tale in modern Tibet: even as they take advantage of
   some of the economic opportunities Chinese rule has brought, many
   Tibetans remain staunchly proud of their own culture. This belies
   Chinese propaganda portraying supporters of the Dalai Lama and Tibetan
   separatism as a dwindling minority.

   On the other hand, the official's story does not quite fit the image
   of modern Tibet fostered by China's critics. In their version,
   economic growth benefits only ethnic Han Chinese. China embarked in
   2000 on a drive to accelerate development in its backward western
   regions, including Tibet. Since then, and especially since last year
   when a railway to Lhasa was completed, pessimists have been mourning
   in advance the death of Tibetans' unique Buddhist culture and
   identity.

   Economic growth, it was argued, would bring a flood of Han Chinese
   immigrants, who would "Hanify" Tibet and murder its culture. But just
   as that culture survived China's invasion in 1950, the flight of the
   Dalai Lama in 1959 and the devastation of the Cultural Revolution in
   the 1960s and 1970s, so it is now resisting the subtler ravages
   wrought by economic progress.

   China's western development policy in part reflects the government's
   belief that economic growth would quench demands for greater political
   liberty. If Tibetans grew richer, surely they would become friendlier
   to life under Chinese rule? And, indeed, some Tibetans are sharing the
   new wealth. Lhasa has become a magnet for Tibetans from across the
   plateau, drawn by the opportunities created there by the booming
   tourist industry for guides, vendors and hotel workers. Scholarships
   take Tibetan students to universities in Beijing and Shanghai.

   Even outside Lhasa, some Tibetans acknowledge that Chinese economic
   policies have brought benefits. In the northern town of Nagqu, for
   example, nomadic herders now have houses to shelter them from the icy
   winter, thanks to economic progress and government aid. Recognising
   Tibetan poverty, the government recently announced that it would offer
   aid to more than 230,000 farmers and herdsmen. The statistics are
   fudged and many Tibetans are still desperately poor, but on the whole
   they are better off than they once were.

   Tibetan tradition has not survived unscathed. Some young people are
   abandoning nomadic life for lucrative urban jobs. Unworldly lamas now
   boast Nike caps. As one bitter gentleman puts it, "there are those who
   have sold out to the Chinese."

   But if the true index of a culture's vitality is its adherence to its
   language, historical memory and religious traditions, Tibetan culture
   shows itself durable. Loyalty to the Dalai Lama, the Tibetan language
   and a view of history in which the Chinese are illegitimate invaders
   will not die soon. Each year, thousands sneak across the border and
   receive "religious and cultural training" from the Dalai Lama's
   government-in-exile. Those who return pass the lessons to their
   compatriots.

   Many of those who do not risk the journey to India work hard at
   preserving their Tibetan heritage. One mother says that she insists
   that her daughter learn Tibetan, and that many others do the same.
   "Chinese is important for work but Tibetan is who we are. If you come
   back to Lhasa in ten years, you'll see many more people speaking
   Chinese. But they would still be Tibetan."

   Such ideas pose no immediate security threat to China. But their
   persistence in the face of genuine danger highlights the limitations
   of Chinese rule. China has, through force, won reluctant submission.
   Acceptance, however, cannot be bought.


   Confusion over who calls the shots in Beijing. But not in Hong Kong


   AFTER meeting China's president, Hu Jintao, last month, America's
   defence secretary, Robert Gates, left Beijing with promises of greater
   co-operation between the two armies, including the installation of a
   hotline. But China's top brass is not making it easy to fulfil Mr Hu's
   hopes of growing friendship. A fortnight later it unexpectedly
   cancelled a Thanksgiving Day port call in Hong Kong by Kitty Hawk, an
   American aircraft-carrier, and several other vessels.

   The incident has again raised questions about how much China's army
   tells its civilian leaders. In January the foreign ministry was caught
   off-guard by the army's test of an anti-satellite weapon. This
   recalled the confusion in 2001 after an American spy plane had
   collided with a Chinese fighter.

   Similar confusion appears to have broken out again. The White House
   said China's foreign minister, Yang Jiechi, had told George Bush that
   the Kitty Hawk incident had been a "misunderstanding". A
   foreign-ministry spokesman in Beijing soon denied this. But he gave no
   explanation. On December 4th the foreign ministry returned to the
   fray, expressing "grave concern" over the Kitty Hawk's decision to
   sail back to Japan through the Taiwan Strait, purportedly because of
   the weather. American carriers normally avoid the strait in deference
   to China's sensitivities.

   China's military or civilian officials had reasons to express
   displeasure with America: a high-profile meeting in October between
   President Bush and the Dalai Lama; or the Pentagon's plans to help
   Taiwan upgrade its missile defences. They may also have wanted to keep
   prying American eyes away from big wargames China was staging in the
   region.

   Or maybe they just wanted to teach America who is in charge in Hong
   Kong these days. Hong Kong's democrats need no reminding of this.
   Their champion, Anson Chan, a former top civil servant, won a
   by-election on December 2nd in a fiercely contested race with a
   Beijing-backed candidate, Regina Ip. Mrs Chan's campaign platform
   called for full democracy in Hong Kong in 2012. But voters know this
   is a pipedream. As China sees it, sovereignty over Hong Kong includes
   the right to rig elections as well as to keep American warships
   guessing.


   As foreign troops become more efficient, government is still the
   problem

                                                                      Pfc

                                    Pfc


   THEY came on foot, by lorry and by helicopter to the great tents at
   the junction of two dry river beds at Charbaran. Bearded men whirled
   rapturously to the sound of a drumbeat, kicking up a cloud of fine
   dust over the American soldiers around them.

   This shura, or tribal council, was the culmination of Operation Attal,
   designed to clear the Taliban from three districts in Paktika, a
   troubled province bordering Pakistan. Three months earlier Charbaran's
   district centre--a government office-cum-police station--had been
   torched by the Taliban and the area was said to be a training ground
   for the insurgents. Now it has been rebuilt with stout sandbagged
   fortifications and artillery for protection.

   In a bloody year that has seen more Western soldiers killed than at
   any time since they toppled the Taliban in 2001, Operation Attal,
   which lasted three weeks, was uneventful. Hardly a shot was fired as
   the Taliban melted away before thousands of Afghan and American
   soldiers. But for the Americans success these days is measured less by
   the number of Taliban killed, and more by the number of Afghans who
   overcome their loyalty to the Taliban, or fear of them, to attend such
   a meeting. The Americans had been hoping for 200 guests; about 1,500
   people came. It was billed as an Afghan reconciliation between local
   tribes and the central government. The choreography, however, was all
   American: American soldiers rebuilt the district centre, erected the
   tents, bulldozed new roads, brought the dignitaries by helicopter and
   even supplied a portrait of President Hamid Karzai.

   One elder complained about the broken promises of development, and
   about the Americans surrounding them with armoured Humvees and roaring
   jets. He also wanted to get the tribe's confiscated weapons back. The
   36-year-old governor, Akram Khapalwak, was having none of it. He
   demanded to know why the area's Kharoti tribe had allowed the
   destruction of the district centre and the theft of government
   vehicles. What was the point in building schools when teachers were
   being intimidated? He said $1m had been given to the Kharoti for
   schools, clinics and water projects, but there was little to show for
   it. "You thieves," said the governor.

   The recriminations over, lunch was served. The elders later agreed to
   provide 30 of their sons for the Afghan police force: a hopeful sign
   that the tribesmen were coming over to the government's side.

   Operation Attal was remarkable for another reason. It was the first
   big operation planned and executed by the Afghan National Army, with
   more than 5,000 Afghan soldiers supported by about 400 Americans from
   the 1-503rd airborne infantry regiment. In the operations centre near
   Gardez, American officers sat in the second row, behind Afghan staff
   officers.

   It was Afghan forces who searched homes while the Americans covered
   their backs. And behind the front-line troops followed lorry-loads of
   humanitarian supplies. The Americans delivered carpets and sound
   systems for the mosques; Korans, food, clothes and blankets against
   the onset of winter; hand-cranked radios to hear government
   broadcasts; doctors and veterinary surgeons. None of this is
   guaranteed to win support, but it helps.

   American soldiers are still involved in a lot of shooting,
   particularly along the border with Pakistan. Indeed, across the
   country, violence has inexorably got worse. This year has seen a
   record number of suicide-bombings as well as a 20% increase in Taliban
   attacks, according to the United Nations. The insurgency has spread
   from the badlands along the frontier with Pakistan to much of the
   country's Pushtu-speaking belt, the Taliban's support base. Kabul is a
   regular target. Although far more American soldiers have been killed
   in Iraq, many more bombs fall in Afghanistan.

   The Taliban can bomb, ambush and intimidate, but cannot conquer
   territory held by Western forces. The question is whether they can
   drain NATO's will to stay on. As one senior Western diplomat admits:
   "Failure is an option."

   Non-kinetic energy

   The mistakes of the past six years of fighting in
   Afghanistan--principally the Americans' decision to have only a "light
   footprint" and the costly diversion into Iraq--have changed the
   mindset of American military commanders. They now regard "kinetic"
   actions (ie, fighting) as a distraction, a preliminary "shaping"
   operation at best. "The decisive operation is non-kinetic," says
   Colonel Martin Schweitzer, commander of Task Force Fury, responsible
   for six south-eastern provinces. His focus is training Afghan forces,
   building roads, schools and clinics and, above all, getting the
   government to "start addressing the needs of the people".

   He has schooled himself in the ways of Pushtunwali, the Pushtun tribal
   code of honour, and has its main tenets on his wall. Next door to his
   office, a group of anthropologists and sociologists known as the
   "human-terrain team" provides him with valuable intelligence, not on
   the enemy but on the society in which they mingle. Colonel Schweitzer
   says what he needs is not more troops but more "non-uniformed
   instruments of power: diplomatic, information and economic",
   especially agronomists and water engineers.

   The colonel reckons that of the 92 districts in his area, the number
   rejecting the Taliban has grown from 19 to 58 in less than a year. The
   change is palpable around his own headquarters at Forward Operating
   Base Salerno, outside the city of Khost. Until last year it used to be
   attacked so often that soldiers called it "Rocket City". No longer.
   Rockets are now a rarity, wild potshots fired from Pakistan. Khost's
   progress against the tide of violence is heartening, especially since
   it lies across the frontier from North Waziristan, the main haven for
   the Taliban and al-Qaeda in Pakistan.

   The Americans say the success is all due to the governor, Arsala
   Jamal. "He is phenomenal. The governor is the centrepiece. We take
   directives from him," says Lieutenant-Colonel Scott Custer (descended
   from George Armstrong Custer, the cavalry officer who lost the battle
   of Little Bighorn) of the 2-321st Airborne Field Artillery Regiment,
   in charge of Khost. The name of his strategy says it all: "Protect the
   Quarterback" (a reference to the vital playmaker in American football
   who needs shielding by his team). It involves creating concentric
   circles of security around Khost of Afghan police and army, with the
   Americans on the outer ring.

                                                                      Pfc
                                                                      Pfc

                                               Custer and his quarterback

   With better security, and with the funds provided by the American
   army, Governor Jamal is able to show progress. "The whole game is
   about confidence-building," he says. "I will never change the minds of
   the bad guys, and the good guys will stay with me. Better security
   builds the confidence of people in the middle."

   The Taliban hate him as much as the Americans love him.
   Suicide-bombers have tried to kill him at least four times since he
   was appointed as governor last year. One of his would-be killers was a
   14-year-old boy from Pakistan who was captured and pardoned.

   Judging from American intelligence intercepts, the Taliban seem
   rattled. "There is a big problem now," one Talib is heard to say.
   "Half [of the people] are with us and the other half are against us."
   Another wrestles with self-doubt: "I hope God directs me in the right
   path. I am not sure if I should do this against my own Afghans. There
   is no point in fighting. Who is the enemy here? We don't have an
   enemy."

   Senior British officers, who until recently regarded themselves as
   experts in counter-insurgency, marvel at the speed with which the
   American army is learning imperial policing. "It is a case of the son
   surpassing the father," says one British officer. Similar changes are
   taking place in the British-controlled province of Helmand. Afghan
   troops have been at the fore of a joint operation with British and
   American forces that retook Musa Qala, the only sizeable town
   controlled by the Taliban, on December 11th.

   The operation, which involved the defection of one Taliban commander,
   will cheer the British after a year of intense but inconclusive
   fighting. Yet the army now finds itself pretty much back to where it
   was in 2006: parcelled out across Helmand's districts, with exposed
   supply lines. The British may have more soldiers, and their outpost
   may be better protected. But the question is whether Afghan forces are
   able to hold the ground on their own. One important objective in
   Helmand has been to reopen the road leading to the Kajaki
   hydroelectric plant to bring up a new turbine and increase the
   electricity supply, but that is still a distant prospect.

   In the neighbouring province of Kandahar, Canadian forces have also
   struggled time and again to recapture the same ground. Fighting the
   Taliban, they quip, is the military equivalent of "mowing the lawn".
   In contrast with the American sector farther east, where troops are
   fighting right up to the border with Pakistan, the British and
   Canadians do not have enough forces to secure their section of the
   frontier, and have abandoned a large swathe of the south to the
   Taliban.

   This year has seen a mini-surge of Western forces, notably from
   America, Britain, Poland and Denmark. Germany and the Netherlands have
   decided to stay in Afghanistan, averting a NATO split. There have been
   successes too, notably the killing of scores of insurgent commanders.
   According to the UN, this has forced the Taliban to appoint Pakistanis
   to replace some of them. But the Taliban have an inexhaustible supply
   of recruits, and a haven in Pakistan in which to organise. They are
   reinforced by foreign fighters linked to al-Qaeda, including Chechens,
   Uzbeks and Turks, who are highly motivated and surprisingly well
   equipped. As the Taliban have been pressed in one area, they have
   moved to cause mayhem elsewhere.

   The Western effort is fragmented. Even close military allies such as
   Britain and America have had rows about tactics. There are two
   separate but overlapping commands, NATO's International Security
   Assistance Force (ISAF) and America's Combined Joint Task Force 82.
   Most training is conducted by another American command. However,
   co-ordination has improved with the appointment of an American,
   General Dan McNeill, to head ISAF. The old distinction between
   "stabilisation", done by NATO, and "counter-terrorism", done by
   America, is blurring.

   On the ground, though, each contingent is fighting its own separate
   war and promoting its separate vision of reconstruction. The fact that
   most countries rotate their units every six months or so makes
   continuity difficult. Americans currently serve 15-month tours, a
   consequence of the acute overstretch of the American army, but it
   means that commanders have time to learn and adapt.

   The state of state-building

   The problem in Afghanistan is not so much the resurgence of the
   Taliban, but the weakness of the Afghan government. The economy has
   grown briskly in recent years, but this has only moved Afghanistan
   from being crushingly poor to extremely poor. Six million children are
   now in school, but 2m still get no education.

   Mr Karzai's government is dependent on foreign aid for about half of
   its budget. Much of the government is ineffective and often corrupt.
   One Western diplomat reckons there are just 200 competent people in
   the whole of the Afghan bureaucracy. The administration of provinces
   and districts, often the only contact between villagers and the
   government, is even more rickety. Provincial governors symbolise the
   state, but policies and budgets are controlled by ministries in Kabul.

   The political balance in Kabul has become more uncertain. The Afghan
   government is essentially a fusion of the anti-Taliban Northern
   Alliance of warlords, dominated by ethnic Tajiks, with a Pushtun head
   in the form of Mr Karzai. Not only have many of the Pushtun tribes
   risen up against the government, but members of the Northern Alliance
   have now formed a political opposition movement with royalists and
   ex-communists.

   Whether by design or by chance, the UN does not fill the vacuum in
   governance. Donors are at odds too. Britain gives most of its aid
   directly to the Afghan government, but America, by far the biggest
   donor, worries about corruption and prefers to entrust its aid
   projects to private American contractors.

   Much of the development work falls by default to army officers,
   working though civil-military groups known as "provincial
   reconstruction teams" (PRTs). Development charities such as Oxfam in
   Britain complain this runs against good practice in aid work; it
   focuses on short-term fixes rather than long-term development, results
   in vastly different levels of spending (the American PRTs are richer
   than the others) and blurs the line between soldiering and traditional
   aid work. There are many stories of armies building schools without
   teachers, and clinics without medicines. Yet imperfect as the PRT
   system may be, military commanders say they have little choice but to
   rely on them. Traditional aid workers will not, or cannot, venture
   into the more dangerous areas of the country.

   Arguably the biggest danger to the future of Afghanistan comes not
   from the external Taliban enemy but from two interconnected internal
   ones: corruption and opium. The police are too often regarded as
   predators rather than protectors. The appointment of police chiefs,
   particularly in posts along lucrative drugs-smuggling routes, is rife
   with corruption. The government and donors are attempting, with mixed
   success, to clean up the force by weeding out tarnished or unqualified
   officers, and raising police salaries to match those of the army. And
   once again, foreign soldiers are stepping in. For instance, America's
   1-503rd infantry regiment has used a former senior FBI investigator to
   arrest an Afghan commander in Paktika accused of funding the Taliban.

   The bigger source of money for the Taliban is illicit poppy
   cultivation. Afghanistan produces 92% of the world's opium-related
   drugs. This year's record crop came overwhelmingly from Helmand, as
   well as other embattled regions. The drugs trade makes up about
   one-third of Afghanistan's GDP. ISAF commanders, who had avoided
   involvement in counter-narcotics, now acknowledge that insurgents and
   drugs-smugglers operate symbiotically and must be tackled together.

   Here too, views are split. The American ambassador to Kabul, William
   Wood, is an enthusiastic supporter of aerial herbicide spraying to
   eradicate the crop. The British, in charge of overseeing the fight
   against opium, worry that this will turn the farmers against the
   Western forces. So far there has been a messy compromise: limited
   manual eradication that has been beset by corruption. It is not just
   the Taliban who benefit from opium; members of the government, even
   close relatives of Mr Karzai, are routinely accused of being drugs
   lords. In the long run, the answer lies in stability and rural
   development. In the short term, few actions would make the government
   more popular than the prosecution of some big bosses of the opium
   trade.

   The West's best weapon

   Like the Greeks, the British and the Soviets before them, America and
   its allies are discovering the old adage that Afghanistan is easy to
   invade, but difficult to control. Can they defy history? Perhaps, but
   only if they accept that a military victory is not possible and that
   they will have to stay for a long time.

   Western countries still enjoy an important asset: the support of
   ordinary Afghans who have no desire to return to the harshness of
   Taliban rule or to the civil wars of the past. Recent polls (see
   chart) show that Afghans are much more strongly in favour of foreign
   forces than Iraqis. However, growing insecurity and civilian
   casualties in air raids are eroding the West's position, especially in
   the south.

   Western opinion is just as important. Gordon Brown, Britain's prime
   minister, was right to announce on December 12th his plan for
   "Afghanisation" of the military campaign, gradually focusing more on
   mentoring and training Afghan forces and economic development. He said
   an effort would be made both locally to recruit armed village guards
   and encourage Taliban to give up their weapons, and regionally to
   improve co-operation.

   Given the shortage of Western troops, Afghanistan's best hope lies in
   expanding and improving its own forces. Afghan soldiers are respected
   both as symbols of the nation and as tough fighters; but the Afghan
   army, which will grow to 70,000 next year, needs to be greatly
   increased. For years it will need to be partnered with Western units
   able to provide close air support, transport and medical evacuations.
   It makes sense to give ISAF more of an Afghan complexion, with plans
   to appoint an Afghan general to help co-ordinate operations. The
   Afghan police will need even more money and training. Once again it is
   America that has taken on the main burden of training the police,
   while Europe's effort has been half-hearted.

   Above all the Afghan government--particularly in the provinces and
   districts--needs to be made more effective. Mr Karzai complains that
   he gets too much contradictory advice from the 40-odd allies in ISAF.
   The appointment of a strong international civil co-ordinator to
   energise the reconstruction effort, and even to give political
   direction for the military campaign, is long overdue.

   Paddy Ashdown, the British politician and former soldier who served as
   the international overseer of Bosnia, is the leading candidate to
   become the new UN chief. He should also be "double-hatted" as the NATO
   civilian representative (and perhaps also as the European envoy). Some
   worry that such a "super-envoy" would either undermine the authority
   of Mr Karzai, or be ineffective because of American predominance.
   There are risks in a foreigner meddling in Afghanistan's intricate
   tribal power game. But the bigger risk is to leave Afghanistan
   violently adrift.


   Playing panda politics with Taiwan

                                                             Imaginechina

                                Imaginechina

   IT'S the ultimate gift for the country that has everything; and China,
   well aware of the diplomatic power of a panda, hands them out
   sparingly. In 2007 Australia and Spain became the latest countries to
   get their own. Spain's pair were sped through the VIP section of
   Madrid airport on their way to the city's zoo. Australia's, offered by
   President Hu Jintao during a visit to Sydney, are expected to arrive
   at Adelaide Zoo in 2009 (for the usual fee, of course).

   The most political of all panda presents are Tuantuan and Yuanyuan
   (left). Now among Wolong's most famous attractions, the two bears were
   offered to Taiwan in 2005. Taiwan's independence-minded government
   turned them down, accusing China of using pandas to further its goal
   of taking over the island. The couple's names did not go down well
   either: tuanyuan means "reunited" in Chinese.

   There is still hope. Taiwan's main opposition party, the Kuomintang,
   may win the presidential election in 2008. The KMT is pro-panda
   (China's offer was made to the party, not directly to the Taiwanese
   government). Despite a ruling by the Council of Agriculture in 2006
   that the pandas could not be imported, Taipei's optimistic zoo has
   been busy building a panda enclosure. A rival bid has been made by a
   nearby theme park, Leofoo Village, which has already built its panda
   facilities. Sean Chuang, chairman of the company that owns Leofoo
   Village, says there is nothing wrong with the pandas' names. A KMT
   spokesman agrees.

   Meanwhile, Tuantuan and Yuanyuan wait in their misty Chinese limbo.
   And pragmatic officials in Sichuan are doing good business luring
   Taiwanese tourists to Wolong to see the pair there.


   The government and the Tigers stop pretending they have a ceasefire


   THE six-year-old ceasefire agreement between the Sri Lankan government
   and the Liberation Tigers of Tamil Eelam had long been in tatters, as
   the two sides had already resumed their 25-year-old war. On January
   2nd it was consigned to the dustbin. The government blamed a bomb
   attack on an army bus in Colombo on the Tigers, and said it would
   abrogate the truce, which had "ceased to have any meaning".

   In Oslo, Erik Solheim, the Norwegian government minister who
   negotiated the agreement, was naturally downcast. Civilians, he said,
   would suffer most, as the Norwegian-led ceasefire monitors would have
   to withdraw, leaving them even less protected.

   The government accused the Tigers of using the truce only to arm and
   recruit, and to carry out attacks against government forces and
   civilians, rather than to seek a peaceful solution to the conflict
   between the Sinhalese majority and the Tamil minority over political
   autonomy. Successive Sri Lankan governments have alleged that the
   Norwegian peace brokers had drafted the truce hastily and rammed it
   down the government's throat.

   Both sides kept accusing each other of reneging on it. The government
   charged that the Tigers had violated the truce more than 10,000 times
   since February 2002, carrying out high-profile assassinations, terror
   attacks and abductions of children. But it had itself been waging a
   no-holds-barred military campaign, liberally using aircraft and
   artillery, in which thousands were killed and over 300,000, mostly
   minority Tamils and Muslims, were displaced.

   The Tigers' reclusive and ruthless leader, Velupillai Prabhakaran,
   late last year vowed to continue the armed struggle for an independent
   "Eelam" (homeland) in the island's north and east. The group did not
   react at once to Colombo's unilateral abrogation.

   Mr Solheim feared the end of the truce will bring "a further
   escalation of violence". As it is, some 5,000 people have died in the
   past two years of "ceasefire". But he had not lost all hope.
   Negotiations would resume sooner or later. "Unfortunately," he said,
   "many people will die in the meantime."


   Forget the national interest, Japan's parties are locked in a tactical
   fight

   [3]Japan's politics

   THE saga that has brought politics in Japan to a halt is nearing its
   crisis. In July the Democratic Party of Japan (DPJ) won control of the
   upper house of the Diet (parliament) from the Liberal Democratic Party
   (LDP), which still controls the lower house and governs in coalition
   with New Komeito, a junior partner. Unlike counterparts in many
   democracies, Japan's upper house has formidable powers. The
   constitution never envisaged a split parliament, with the upper house
   able to veto nearly every government bill. The government could
   overrule a veto with its two-thirds' majority in the lower house. Yet
   this weapon has not been used in 50 years, and may backfire,
   particularly if the public deems its use unwarranted.

   This week the upper house began deliberating a bill passed last month
   that would send the Japanese navy back to the Indian Ocean to provide
   fuel to American-led operations in Afghanistan. Hardly central to the
   "war on terror", the mission was still the most visible proof that
   Japan was showing the flag. But it was hurriedly recalled on November
   1st, when the DPJ refused to allow an extension to its mandate.

   Internationalists in both parties are embarrassed that Japan, yet
   again, appears weak-kneed over its international responsibilities.
   Nevertheless the DPJ's leader, Ichiro Ozawa, is playing hardball. He
   vows to oppose the bill, despite dissent even within his own party.
   His predecessor as leader, Seiji Maehara, says that to rely on a
   United Nations mandate to send the army abroad, as Mr Ozawa insists
   Japan should, "is to give Russia and China power of veto over Japan's
   foreign policy."

   Now comes an intense tactical game, which Yasuo Fukuda, prime minister
   since September, must win to hang on in power. Mr Fukuda has already
   extended the Diet's current extraordinary session once, until December
   15th, so that the refuelling bill can be deliberated in the upper
   house. But that is not enough time. He might have been tempted to let
   the bill lapse. He does not believe Japan should join every
   American-led "coalition of the willing". Besides, in early November he
   held private talks with Mr Ozawa about forging a "grand coalition",
   for which he might have jettisoned the bill. Yet Mr Ozawa's complicity
   shocked his party's executive. He resigned as DPJ leader, but was
   hurriedly reinstated for lack of an alternative.

   Mr Fukuda has since been to Washington, DC, where he assured Mr Bush
   he would make every effort to send the ships back to the Indian Ocean.
   With honour at stake, the prime minister will probably extend the Diet
   session one last time, waiting for the upper house either to reject
   the refuelling bill or to sit on it for a full 60 days, which amounts
   to the same thing. He will then try to ram the bill into law using the
   coalition's supermajority, and the upper house will probably condemn
   the government with a motion of no confidence.

   Until recently, such a motion was thought dramatic enough to have the
   prime minister dissolve the government and call a general election.
   But the game is fast changing. For a start, though no fervent public
   support exists for the refuelling mission, there is no passionate
   opposition. And despite a growing defence-procurement scandal, the DPJ
   has failed to implicate LDP politicians--even Fukushiro Nukaga, now
   finance minister, to whom scandals usually stick like a faithful dog.
   Lastly, not everyone in the DPJ really wants a snap election. Though
   the party is certain to pick up seats, DPJ candidates have yet to be
   selected for many districts, and even then only a miracle would grant
   the party a lower-house victory. The odds are rising that Mr Fukuda
   might shake off the upper-house censure, explain to the country that
   he tried his best to secure co-operation, and continue as prime
   minister.

   If so, the refuelling saga will prove a mere skirmish before real
   battle is joined over next year's budget and the livelihood issues
   that ordinary Japanese care about-- at a time, Sadakazu Tanigaki, the
   LDP's policy chief, points out, of a soft economy at home and a
   darkening economic outlook abroad. The Diet's ordinary session will
   open in January, and the government must pass a budget before the
   fiscal year beginning on April 1st. Though the lower house can do that
   alone, the upper house must also approve a raft of bills required if
   the budget deficit is to be financed and government salaries and
   contracts paid.

   Again, Mr Fukuda will present himself as a model of reasonableness,
   listening to opposition demands to boost welfare and tackle regional
   inequalities. Yet meeting such demands would bust the budget. And
   there will be pressure to pass bills swiftly. Perhaps talk of a grand
   coalition will resurface. More likely, a budget clash will loom, and
   Mr Fukuda will use the supermajority once again, this time to keep the
   government running. If the public blamed him for the confrontation, Mr
   Fukuda might then feel the need to dissolve the government. Mr Fukuda
   intends to prove he can be more than a stopgap "caretaker" prime
   minister. But most lower-house politicians expect an election as early
   as April, and many have run up their campaign posters in readiness for
   a January snap election--just in case.


   The opposition pulls itself together 

                                                                  Reuters

                                  Reuters

       Lee Myung-bak looks for encouragement from Park Geun-hye's Dad


   AS BEFITS a daughter of a former president and a presidential aspirant
   herself, Park Geun-hye has a house and garden in one of Seoul's most
   expensive districts. It is not hard to find. Residents and
   petrol-station attendants helpfully point the way. Yet her party's
   leader, Lee Myung-bak, who narrowly defeated her in a primary election
   to represent the Grand National Party in this December's presidential
   election, has not visited and until last week had not telephoned.

   Mr Lee's tin ear to Ms Park and her supporters opened up dissension in
   the ranks and paved the way for Lee Hoi-chang, a former party chairman
   and twice a losing presidential candidate, to declare his candidacy
   yet again--this time as an independent. Mr Lee vowed to end the
   "sunshine policy" of aid to North Korea, thereby--it was
   thought--appealing to Ms Park's more conservative supporters.

   This year's presidential election is beginning to look a bit like the
   previous one, in 2002, which also involved divisions in the Grand
   National Party, a third candidate (who withdrew at the last minute),
   Lee Hoi-chang's candidacy--and corruption charges. This time, Lee
   Hoi-chang's advisers say Lee Myung-bak is vulnerable to questions
   about his role in a fraudulent investment scheme from which he
   allegedly benefited while others lost out. Lee Myung-bak denies the
   allegations and says he will resign if he is found to have played a
   role in the fraud, known as BBK, the name of the failed investment
   company.

   The candidate of the liberal ruling party, Chung Dong-young, has
   failed to capitalise on the opposition's infighting. Mr Chung lags
   behind Lee Hoi-chang, who in turn trails far behind Lee Myung-bak,
   according to opinion polls.

   In 1997, the Grand National Party, then in power, blew a large lead by
   squabbling; it does not want that to happen again. The desire for
   unity has increased Ms Park's power to demand concessions in return
   for support. Lee Myung-bak capitulated this week, promising to
   co-operate with Ms Park on future policy decisions, and blaming
   himself for disunity. "I have been inconsiderate," the contrite former
   mayor of Seoul says. That was enough to win Ms Park's endorsement.

   Lee Hoi-chang's supporters are unperturbed, vowing to continue the
   fight until the December 19th election. "What will happen when the BBK
   founder returns to Korea to defend himself?" they ask.

   Lee Myung-bak's supporters are equally unperturbed. They point out
   that their candidate weathered weeks of withering criticism from Ms
   Park about BBK during the primary election and his support remains
   solid. With Ms Park now endorsing the front runner, they expect Lee
   Hoi-chang's support to ebb. If polls are any guide, the bulldozer--as
   Lee Myung-bak is known--is still on course for victory.


   The BJP picks its octogenarian

                                                                      AFP

                                    AFP

                    Advani's number one--for the moment


   INDIA'S Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP) has been in a mess since it
   unexpectedly lost the general election of 2004 to a coalition led by
   the Congress party. Leadership and policy squabbles have hampered its
   effectiveness in opposition, and no strong figure has emerged to take
   charge following the gradual retirement of Atal Bihari Vajpayee, a
   former prime minister whose equanimity fudged many of the party's
   harsher Hindu-nationalist policies. Now the party hopes to reverse
   that decline.

   At 82 and unwell, Mr Vajpayee has endorsed his colleague of over 30
   years, Lal Krishna Advani, the head of the party in Parliament, as the
   BJP's prime-ministerial candidate in the next general election. But Mr
   Advani, whose new role was announced on December 10th, is 80 and,
   though leaner and fitter than Mr Vajpayee, will have a tough time
   reimposing discipline and renewing vigour in what used to be one of
   India's more orderly parties.

   Mr Advani has been seen as a leading hardliner since he led a march in
   1992 that demolished an ancient Muslim mosque on a disputed religious
   site in Ayodhya, sparking widespread riots. In recent years he has
   tried to soften his image, even to the extent of making generous
   remarks about Muhammad Ali Jinnah, the founder of Pakistan, when he
   visited India's neighbour two years ago. That was too much for the
   BJP's parent organisation, the Rashtriya Swayamsevak Sangh (RSS),
   which forced his resignation as party president. He was replaced by
   Rajnath Singh, a capable administrator and regional politician in his
   mid-50s, who seemed to embody the generational shift that the party
   needs. Since then, however, Mr Singh has failed to become a unifying
   leader.

   The next general election is not due till 2009, so naming a
   prime-ministerial candidate could have been left a while--had it not
   been for two things. The first is the prospect of a snap poll if
   leftist parties withdraw their support for the government over India's
   proposed nuclear deal with America. Prakash Karat, leader of the
   biggest of the communist parties, gave warning recently that he would
   do just that by the end of this month if the government continued its
   current talks on the deal with the Vienna-based International Atomic
   Energy Agency.

   The second is the possibility of a leadership bid by Narendra Modi,
   the BJP's controversial and egotistical chief minister in Gujarat,
   whose approach to Muslims makes Mr Advani look like a softie. Polling
   is now taking place in Gujarat's assembly elections and Mr Modi's
   national ambitions would be "virtually unstoppable" if the BJP won,
   says Mahesh Rangarajan, a political analyst. That would be a problem
   in the rest of the party because Mr Modi alienates the RSS and others
   in the BJP with his centralising, autocratic style. Even more
   important, as prime minister he would find it virtually impossible to
   attract allies to a national coalition government if the BJP were the
   victor. With no other BJP politician of national stature, the party
   had little choice but to turn to Mr Advani for the moment. But in the
   long run others will have to emerge if Mr Modi is to be contained: he
   is only 57, and has a couple of decades to go, judging by the usual
   longevity of Indian politicians.


   The front-runner in South Korea's presidential poll is nicknamed the
   bulldozer. He seems to be boring his way towards the Blue House

                                                                  Reuters

                                  Reuters


   NOT many people can realistically hope to be elected president on
   their birthday. But December 19th is not only election day in South
   Korea but also the 66th birthday and 37th wedding anniversary of the
   runaway favourite, Lee Myung-bak. Mr Lee is a former mayor of Seoul
   who has led the opinion polls throughout the year by a country mile.
   This month prosecutors absolved him of involvement in an investment
   fraud, seemingly clearing away his last hurdle before the vote.

   Yet few seem to muster much enthusiasm for the birthday boy. At his
   campaign rallies supporters clad in blue sweatshirts bearing his
   likeness try to galvanise onlookers with chants, dance routines and a
   throbbing, disco-like campaign song. The crowds remain desultory. In
   one stop outside Seoul earlier this month, the biggest cheer was for a
   group of children who waved at the candidate from the open windows of
   their school.

   This is odd. Presidential elections used to arouse paroxysms of
   emotion in South Korea. If Mr Lee were to win, he would bring an end
   to a decade of rule by two presidents, Kim Dae-jung and Roh Moo-hyun,
   who were liberal in the Korean sense (that is, slightly less
   pro-business and pro-American). His party represents the conservative
   old guard, though he himself is not a member of the traditional elite,
   nor does he hold their hardline views about North Korea. Whoever
   becomes president, moreover, will take over at a time when relations
   between the hermit kingdom and the rest of the world have reached a
   delicate point, with the rest still unsure about whether the North
   will give up its nuclear weapons.

   Why then has the 2007 campaign ignited so little passion? Perhaps
   because Mr Lee has enjoyed a lead in the opinion polls for so long (in
   the week before the vote, he was over 20 points ahead of his main
   rivals, who seem almost to have given up). Perhaps because no one else
   has caught the public's imagination either. The main challengers
   include a disaffected former leader of Mr Lee's Grand National Party,
   Lee Hoi-chang, who has twice failed to win the presidency. The leading
   liberal candidate, Chung Dong-young, is a former television anchorman
   who has turned off voters with his personal attacks on Mr Lee.

   And perhaps because of the man himself. Raspy-voiced, with a
   reputation for being aloof and prickly, Mr Lee is not a natural
   politician. He refuses to appear on South Korea's main commercial
   broadcaster, MBC, because he accuses it of bias. Every day ranks of
   police officers guard the main entrance of MBC as Mr Lee's supporters
   denounce its journalists. But like the presidential campaign itself,
   the protests lack numbers and fire.

   Ordinarily, his opponents might have been able to exploit Mr Lee's
   stilted manner. Instead it has become an advantage. Koreans care
   mainly about the economy. They want a competent manager and Mr Lee
   seems to fit the bill. As a child, he helped his mother sell popsicles
   and seaweed rolls. He put himself through university by working as a
   rubbish collector. He rose through the ranks of Hyundai to become
   chief executive of ten different affiliates. Lingering suspicion that
   his business dealings may not have been pristine has been overlooked.
   South Korea is going through a period of relative economic malaise and
   voters want faster growth than the 5% achieved last year under
   President Roh, the best showing of his presidency.

   Rising property prices have pushed workers in Seoul, home to half the
   population, far away from the capital, causing endless commutes to
   12-hour-a-day jobs. Parents who pay for private classes so their
   children can keep up in pressure-cooker schools want changes to the
   education system. Many Koreans demand a comprehensive social-security
   system, as befits the world's 13th largest economy. The next president
   will also have to ensure it is not business as usual between his
   office, the Blue House, and the country's conglomerates. The biggest,
   Samsung, stands accused by a former executive of widespread bribery,
   including of politicians.

   Mr Lee is responding to these varied demands with a
   comprehensive--even grandiose--list of promises. He says he can get
   growth up to 7% a year, bring average incomes up to $40,000 a year and
   make South Korea the world's seventh-largest economy by 2017. All this
   is to be achieved by cutting taxes, trimming public spending by 10%,
   easing the burden of regulation, improving the efficiency of medical
   spending and building a giant canal system through the middle of the
   country to create jobs and cut pollution. He is not promising to make
   pigs fly.

   If he wins, Mr Lee will face divisions in both country and party.
   Since the end of the Korean War, South Korea has been split along
   regional lines. The eastern part, Gyeongsang, has traditionally
   produced the country's leaders (Mr Lee grew up there, though he was
   born in Japan). They have tended to favour their hometowns at the
   expense of the south-west Jeolla region.

   The Grand National Party is also beset by internal rifts, notably
   between Mr Lee and Park Geun-hye, the daughter of a former military
   dictator, Park Chung-hee. Ms Park wants to run for president in five
   years' time. She also wants a hand in picking the party's candidates
   for parliamentary elections due in April 2008. If they cannot work
   together, Mr Lee's proposals may face an icy reception in parliament.

   Mr Lee has few specific ideas about getting North Korea to give up its
   nuclear weapons, beyond making aid and investment conditional on
   disarmament. "North Korea must take steps to demonstrate it wants
   peace before there is widespread economic assistance or investment by
   South Korea," says one of his closest foreign-policy advisers. In Mr
   Lee's view, the last two presidents have weakened South Korea's
   military alliance with America, and he promises to reinvigorate it. He
   also plans a range of co-operative economic agreements with Asian
   neighbours--and with Russia, in the hope of securing long-term oil and
   gas contracts in eastern Siberia. In short, all things to all
   countries.

   Many South Koreans have been disappointed by the decade-long rule of
   liberal presidents who promised much but failed to deliver either
   strong growth or uncorrupt leadership. They were also put off by
   President Roh's inability to create more jobs and reduce social
   inequality. In contrast Mr Lee's record as mayor of Seoul suggests he
   can get things done. But if he does win, he will do so partly because
   he has raised expectations--and will suffer all the more if he cannot
   live up to them.


                                                                  Reuters

                                  Reuters

   General Musharraf goes back to Civvy Street. Other civilians are not
   happy


   PERVEZ MUSHARRAF, Pakistan's beleaguered president, who prides himself
   on being a man of his word, had often promised to stand down as chief
   of the army. So on November 28th he inspected a guard of honour in
   Rawalpindi and passed the baton to General Ashfaq Pervez Kayani.
   Dressed in full regalia and bursting with emotion, General Musharraf
   said: "This army is my life, my passion. I love this army, and this
   relationship will continue, although I will not be in uniform." Aptly,
   the military band gave him a stirring send-off with "Auld Lang Syne".

   The next day plain "Mr" Musharraf was sworn in as a civilian president
   of the country by his new handpicked chief justice. His advisers say
   that President Musharraf will soon lift the state of emergency he
   imposed on November 3rd. That unconstitutional "deviation", as it is
   called in Pakistan, enabled Mr Musharraf to sack 12 judges of the
   supreme court who seemed bent on overthrowing him. He replaced them
   with more pliant ones. They have now duly legitimised his presidency.

   Even by Pakistani standards, it has been a tumultuous week. Mr
   Musharraf had long thundered that he would not allow Nawaz Sharif, the
   former prime minister he ousted in a coup in 1999, to return to
   Pakistan from exile in Saudi Arabia and rejoin politics. Indeed, when
   Mr Sharif tried to come home in September, he was bundled into a
   waiting aircraft at Islamabad and shunted off to Jeddah. But another
   former prime minister in exile, Benazir Bhutto, was allowed back on
   October 18th, thanks to American pressure on General Musharraf to make
   an alliance with her liberal People's Party. Mr Musharraf flew to
   Riyadh on November 22nd in a bid to convince King Abdullah to hang on
   to Mr Sharif until after the general elections on January 8th. But,
   far from entertaining the plea, the monarch dispatched Mr Sharif to
   Pakistan in a royal aircraft on November 25th, just in time to file
   his nomination papers for the elections.

   The opposition is seized with the difficulty of ensuring free and fair
   elections, or, failing that, of forging a united front to boycott the
   polls. Neither task is easy. Mr Musharraf has packed the election
   commission and caretaker administration with loyalists and rigged the
   rules.

   The opposition, moreover, is divided. Miss Bhutto has gauged her
   popularity--huge crowds welcomed her on October 18th--and wants to
   contest an election. But she is using the threat of a boycott to press
   demands that the state of emergency be lifted, pro-Musharraf local
   governments suspended, and the election commission reformed. Maulana
   Fazal ur Rehman, the leader of the biggest religious party, wants much
   the same. He hopes to form governments in the North-West Frontier
   province and Baluchistan.

   Only Mr Sharif favours a boycott. But he fears he would be sidelined
   if he goes it alone. So he is hedging his bets. He has filed his
   nomination papers but is also hoping for an all-parties conference to
   agree on a boycott. If, as seems likely, Mr Musharraf meets some
   opposition demands, the elections will go ahead.

   But they may not provide stability to Mr Musharraf's position--let
   alone Pakistan's. The country is bitterly divided across religious,
   regional, ethnic and class lines. Coalition governments in Islamabad
   and in the provinces are inevitable. As in the past, Mr Musharraf's
   party will be inclined to make alliances with the religious parties.
   But that will be looked at askance in America, which frets that such
   expedient political alliances help explain why Mr Musharraf's
   prosecution of the war against Islamist terrorists is ineffectual.

   However, if Mr Musharraf wants a deal with Miss Bhutto, he will have
   to share power with her, perhaps as prime minister, a prospect neither
   he nor his party relishes. If he spurns her, she will join hands with
   Mr Sharif and the mullahs to dethrone him. When Parliament meets in
   February, he will need a two-thirds majority to legitimise his
   "deviation" on November 3rd. Failing that, he would risk impeachment
   and have to turn for help to his new army chief, General Kayani.
   Pakistan would revert to rule by the "troika" of army chief, president
   and prime minister, an arrangement that has scarred politics since the
   restoration of democracy in 1988. One elected government after another
   has been sacked by the president (thrice) or the army chief (once, in
   1999).


   Disposing of rubbish, and wrecking livelihoods

   TARA BAI, a ragpicker in Mumbai who was named after an Indian queen,
   shakes her head angrily when asked if she is disgusted by her job:
   picking through mounds of rotting refuse for sellable plastic and
   metal. "It's not like that; it's how I survive," says the farmer's
   daughter, who moved to the city in 1972, when drought ended her rural
   life. But opening a fresh sack of rubbish to reveal millions of
   squirming maggots, she turns away as if to stop herself gagging.

   No one knows how many ragpickers there are in India. In Delhi alone,
   there are more than 300,000. They earn 100-150 rupees ($2.50-3.75) for
   eight hours' work. They save the Municipal Corporation of Delhi (MCD)
   an estimated 600,000 rupees in daily waste-disposal costs, reckons
   Chintan, a charity that campaigns for their welfare.

   A small improvement came last month when Delhi's government equipped
   400 ragpickers with protective gloves and clothing. It is also giving
   them health-and-safety training and, if the scheme is successful, will
   repeat the exercise with another 4,000 scavengers. "It is to help them
   in their upliftment", says Dr Sabata, an official at Delhi's
   environment ministry. Almost all ragpickers are dalits, once known as
   untouchables.

   Ragpickers suffer from dreadfully high levels of illness, especially
   respiratory diseases. But health is not, at present, the main concern
   of the groups that campaign for them. In recent months, ragpickers in
   Delhi have been denied access to much of the rubbish upon which they
   depend. In its drive to spruce up the capital for the 2010
   Commonwealth games, the MCD has awarded waste-collection contracts to
   private companies in six of its 12 zones. These firms dump rubbish in
   inaccessible containers without any thought for recycling. This is
   unsurprising. They earn six rupees per tonne of collected rubbish;
   sold on, that refuse would fetch just over five rupees. Chintan has
   researched the impact in two zones, and has found that half the
   ragpickers reported a substantial drop in earnings.

   In Mumbai, waste collection has not yet been privatised, but it might
   be soon. "The government wants Mumbai to be modern, clean," says Jyoti
   Mhapsekar, president of Stree Mukti Sanghatana, a charity that works
   with the city's poorest. "But it will take away the livelihoods of
   these people." It will also, she adds, strip urban India of one of its
   few green credentials. Ragpickers, who leave no rubbish that is
   reusable, are the original recyclers; without them an impressive
   industry will be lost.


   But it still colours Narendra Modi's campaign for re-election in
   Gujarat

                                                                      AFP

                                    AFP


   AS A cheerleader for the emerging India, a giant democracy with--at
   last--an economy to match, Narendra Modi is a disgrace. His six-year
   leadership of Gujarat, a booming western state, is widely cited as a
   paragon of economic management. But double-digit growth is not all
   that Mr Modi--who is seeking re-election in a poll due to begin on
   December 11th--is alleged to have orchestrated.

   There is also the small matter of 2,000 murdered Muslims, victims of a
   2002 pogrom carried out by his Hindu-nationalist followers with the
   collusion of Gujarat's bureaucracy and police. This week the widow of
   a Muslim politician called Ahsan Jafri, whose limbs and genitals were
   hacked off and the rest of him burned alive, was due to file a
   petition in the Supreme Court, accusing Mr Modi of mass murder. There
   is little justice for Muslims in Gujarat. Only eight people have been
   convicted over the pogrom, mostly in neighbouring states. In Gujarat,
   some 2,000 cases remain pending.

   A small matter, however, is just how the pogrom is viewed in Gujarat,
   the birth-place of Mahatma Gandhi, and a bastion of prohibition,
   vegetarianism and gnat-respecting Jains. Its last election, later in
   2002, gave Mr Modi a thumping majority, biggest in those districts
   where the bloodshed was worst. Mr Modi's campaign that year exploited
   anti-Muslim sentiment. He foamed and raved against Pakistan's leader,
   Pervez Musharraf--meaning, his audiences knew, scheming Muslims in
   their midst. Many considered--and consider--the pogrom to be a
   legitimate act of revenge against a poor minority making up 9% of
   Gujarat's population. It was organised by supporters of Mr Modi's
   Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP) after 58 Hindu activists were killed in a
   fire on a train for which, on scant evidence, Muslims were blamed.

   This time Mr Modi's campaign has been more sober. He has unleashed the
   odd rant against "terrorists", and a few barbs at Mr Musharraf. But
   the BJP'S leader has been much keener to trumpet Gujarat's recent
   economic performance--including growth of 11.5% last year. The change
   of tack may be because he is chary of the contempt the outside world
   holds for him. In 2005 America revoked his visa. EU countries have
   also denied him diplomatic status. This has been damaging to his
   ambitions to lead the BJP, and India. Mr Modi is already its most
   globe-trotting state boss. This year he has visited China, South
   Korea, Japan and Switzerland.

   But elections in India are not won by leading trade delegations--even
   in Gujarat, which has 24% of India's coastline and a proud commercial
   tradition. Moreover the slogan Mr Modi is most associated with,
   "Vibrant Gujarat"--the name of a biennial trade fair he has
   staged--recalls the ill-fated "India Shining" campaign run by India's
   last BJP-led government for the general election in 2004. It was
   turfed out by the masses for whom India did not shine. Many in the
   Congress party, which leads the coalition that won that election,
   predict that Mr Modi will suffer the same fate.

   His camp is certainly unhappy. Leaders of two powerful castes, the
   Patels and Kolis, which usually vote BJP, have rebelled against Mr
   Modi. They dislike his autocratic ways--and, perhaps, his intolerance
   of corruption. A total of 50 former BJP members of the outgoing
   assembly have refused or been denied the party's ticket. Eight are
   instead standing for Congress. The Vishwa Hindu Parishad, a Hindu
   group heavily implicated in the 2002 slaughter, is also upset with Mr
   Modi. Indeed, there are many in the BJP who would like to see him
   fall. With a general election due by May 2009, India's main opposition
   party is suffering a crisis of ideology and leadership. Another
   thumping win for the divisive Mr Modi would strengthen his claim to
   supply both.

   These divisions have given Congress hope. Its supporters also point
   out that Congress did better in Gujarat in the 2004 general election
   than in 2002. Its leader, Sonia Gandhi, has campaigned hard in
   Gujarat. A strong showing by Congress would be a bitter blow to the
   BJP. It might even embolden Mrs Gandhi to call a general election
   early next year, or at least to push through a controversial nuclear
   co-operation deal with America over the objections of the government's
   Communist allies. As the Communists have said they will forsake the
   government if the deal survives, this might come to the same thing.

   The BJP, however, remains the favourite. In 2002 it won 126 out of 182
   seats. Gujarat's illegal bookmakers, famed for their prescience,
   expect it to win again, with a smaller majority. Betting has been
   heavy. Meanwhile, few commentators have dwelt on the poll's most
   depressing aspect: Congress's own careful reluctance to mention the
   2002 massacre--let alone Mr Modi's alleged part in it. This makes
   electoral sense. Attacking Mr Modi for failing to protect Muslims
   might remind Gujaratis why they used to like him so much.

   After all, last month, in a brave investigation into the pogrom, an
   Indian magazine, Tehelka, published transcripts of Gujarati
   Hindu-nationalists confessing to hideous murders and rapes. One
   alleged that Mr Modi had granted them three days to do this work
   unimpeded by the police--which is in fact what happened. No action has
   been taken against them. Instead, senior Congress figures have accused
   Tehelka of being in cahoots with the BJP. Gujarati bookies responded
   to its report by shortening the odds on Mr Modi.


   Small farmers lose their livelihoods to corrupt officials

   ONE day in December, 70-year-old Doung Moeurn and her neighbours
   arrived to work on their rice paddies to find soldiers putting up a
   barbed-wire fence around them. As in China, across Cambodia growing
   numbers of small farmers and slum-dwellers have fallen victim to
   land-grabbing.

   The country's rapid economic growth in recent years has meant that
   land, having hitherto been almost worthless, is now a
   fast-appreciating asset. Almost any Cambodian with a bit of spare cash
   is taking a speculative punt, snapping up a chunk of land in the hope
   of easy profits. Small farmers, and poor people living in shacks in
   the towns and cities, usually have no proof that they own their land
   or homes. This makes it easy for the speculators--often politicians,
   civil servants or army brass--to work the corrupt legal system to take
   the ground from under their feet.

   Public anger over land grabs has risen to the point where the prime
   minister, Hun Sen, an elected strongman, is having to distance himself
   from those among the upper ranks of his Cambodian People's Party who
   are the worst culprits. On March 5th Mr Hun Sen publicly rebuked them
   for ruining the party's reputation, and gave them a "last chance" to
   abandon their dodgy land deals or be sacked. An unnamed army general
   was being demoted for disobeying this order, he said. Others, he
   thundered in his typically no-nonsense style, may face an even worse
   fate: "I really don't want bloodshed, but if you still fail to obey
   me, blood must flow."

   Doung Moeurn says her family had been farming their patch of earth, in
   the rural province of Kompong Speu, since 1979. They have complained
   to the authorities, but so far to no avail. As they point out the
   offending fence and the guard-post with dozing soldiers at one corner
   of it, the head of a nearby village, whose people also lost land,
   turns up. He says he went to the provincial court the previous day but
   was told it could do nothing to help.

   Roth Thawy, from the local office of ADHOC, a human-rights group, says
   the villagers' case was one of 33 land-grabbing complaints received
   from across Kompong Speu last year. Mr Roth Thawy said he went to the
   nearby army base to find out why its soldiers had fenced off the
   villagers' land. A senior officer told him it was needed for
   unspecified military purposes. Some of his troops, however, said they
   had heard the land was being sold on to a businessman. Sometimes, say
   ADHOC's campaigners, farmers do get compensation, but usually only a
   pittance.

   Cambodia is recovering slowly from the chaos left by the communist
   Khmer Rouge regime of 1975-79 and the civil war that followed its
   collapse. A 1989 law allows those who occupy land for at least five
   years to claim ownership. But so far only a small fraction of the
   millions of rural households entitled to claim the deeds to their land
   have actually received them.

   The World Bank is helping the government to speed up the issuing of
   deeds, but it worries that landlessness is still getting worse. About
   a fifth of rural households now have no land, it reckons, while much
   land, snapped up by speculators, sits idle. Land-grabbing is only part
   of the problem: other causes include population growth and the
   increasing demand for land for industry and large-scale plantations.
   Even those small farmers still in possession of their land are
   reluctant to put time and money into improving it. This means that
   agricultural output is lower--and poverty higher--than they should be.

   Land-grabbing cases are popping up all over the country, even at Boeng
   Kak lake, right behind the government's information ministry in the
   capital, Phnom Penh. Over 4,000 families face eviction from their
   lakeside shacks by developers who have signed a deal with the
   municipality to drain the lake and build over it. Whatever the 1989
   law says, the ill-educated poor are usually defeated by the
   well-connected rich in any legal battle.

   Will Mr Hun Sen keep his promise to rein in his land-grabbing
   apparatchiks? ADHOC's national leader, Thun Saray, is sceptical: he
   says the prime minister often promises big reforms but fails to
   deliver. In other countries with land conflicts--Brazil is a prime
   example--powerful landless peasants' movements can whip up big, angry
   protests that force the government to act. Cambodia does not have one
   of these: at least, not yet.


                                                                  Reuters

                                  Reuters

   Dissidents detect a slight thaw. But no one is hailing a Beijing
   spring


   FLANKED by plainclothes policemen, a former top Chinese official, now
   a leading dissident, greets a foreign journalist outside his apartment
   building. The police are welcoming too. After noting down the
   visitor's identity, they allow him to proceed to the dissident's flat
   to interview him. Only a few months ago, journalists were strictly
   barred. China's curtain of repression is not lifting. But it is
   twitching.

   This is a sensitive time of year in China. June 4th is the anniversary
   of the suppression of the Tiananmen Square protests in 1989. Most
   years since then, dissidents have tried to use the occasion to stage
   protests. Four days later falls the 50th anniversary of the
   "anti-rightist movement", a sweeping campaign launched by Mao Zedong
   to crush dissent. As usual, the state-controlled press is under orders
   to ignore these dates. Party leaders do not want to revive memories of
   past repression.

   The party still stamps on dissent. Human-rights activists and members
   of unauthorised religious groups are occasionally harassed or jailed.
   Liberal newspaper editors are sacked. Outspoken websites are closed
   down. Organised opposition to the party remains banned. But in the
   past few months, some dissidents say they have noticed an easing. One
   such is Bao Tong, the former senior official.

   Party leaders have reason to be worried about what Mr Bao (on the
   right above) might say. He was a top aide to the late Zhao Ziyang
   (left), who was Communist Party chief until he was deposed in 1989 for
   being too soft on the Tiananmen protesters. Mr Bao was a member of the
   party's Central Committee and the highest-ranking official jailed (for
   seven years) for his role in the unrest. In a still tightly secretive
   political system, Mr Bao, now 75, knows where the party buries its
   bodies.

   He links the authorities' decision to let him meet foreign--though not
   Chinese--journalists to this year's new regulations allowing the
   foreign media a freer rein in China around the Olympic Games in
   Beijing in August 2008. He does not see this as a big change of heart.
   Some 30 police are detailed to keep watch over him, he estimates.
   China is open, he says, as long as one does not criticise the party's
   leadership. Yet Mr Bao shows little restraint in attacking its
   corruption and repressive instincts, as well as one-party rule in
   general. Before Tiananmen, he says, liberal party officials reckoned
   there could be multi-candidate elections for the post of party chief
   by 2002. Now, he says, Chinese leaders are too afraid of losing
   control.

   This fear is reflected in the party's refusal to address the
   complaints of victims of the anti-rightist movement. By the party's
   own--very conservative--estimate, more than 500,000 intellectuals were
   subjected to punishment ranging from criticism and dismissal from
   their jobs to forced labour and imprisonment. In 1981, five years
   after the death of Mao, the party ruled that the anti-rightist
   movement had gone too far; all but a handful of those labelled as
   rightists were rehabilitated. But the party still maintained that it
   was right to have launched it.

   Mao Yushi, a prominent economist, is one of 60 of the movement's
   victims who launched a petition earlier this year calling for the
   campaign to be declared unconstitutional. He says there has been no
   response from the party. Mr Mao, now 78, says the movement turned it
   into a "party of liars", incapable of changing. Party leaders, he
   says, feel weak and are focused on maintaining stability. Any
   re-evaluation of the anti-rightist movement or of Tiananmen, they
   believe, could rock the boat.

   Holes in the net

   Yet both wittingly and unwittingly, the party is giving its critics
   more breathing space. The rapid spread of the internet has helped
   dissidents publicise their views and keep in contact. Hu Jia, a
   human-rights activist who campaigns for victims of HIV/AIDS, spent
   more than 200 days under virtual house arrest until early this year.
   His wife, Zeng Jinyan, posted reports on her blog. Mr Hu says police
   have this month again been stopping him from going out, except for a
   brief hospital visit, accusing him of threatening state security.

   But it is becoming less common in Beijing for dissidents to suffer
   such tight restrictions. Liu Xiaobo, a former lecturer once described
   by China's media as a "black hand" behind the Tiananmen unrest, and
   now a prolific online essayist, says the police have left him alone
   since early March. For the past two years they were posted
   continuously outside his home between March and June. Ding Zilin, who
   organises a group of mothers of Tiananmen victims, says foreign
   journalists have found it much easier this year to visit her apartment
   without official interference. Last month the authorities allowed two
   Tiananmen activists, Chen Ziming and Ren Wanding, to visit Hong
   Kong--the first time they had been allowed to leave the Chinese
   mainland since 1989.

   In recent months, Zhang Yihe, whose late father, Zhang Bojun, was one
   of the anti-rightist movement's most senior targets, has fought a
   spirited campaign against government censors after their attack on one
   of her books, about Chinese opera stars. Ms Zhang had apparently
   offended the powers-that-be with her previous writing about the
   sufferings of intellectuals, including her father, in the 1957
   campaign. Her online attacks against the censors, and her unavailing
   attempt to sue them, were widely supported by Chinese internet
   commentators. Ms Zhang says she is proud her father was a rightist.
   And cross though she is at the censors, they have done wonders, she
   says, for her sales.


   Thailand is on the election trail and heading towards uncertainty

                                                                  Reuters

                                  Reuters

   "WE'RE not selling fish sauce, this is an election rally," jokes
   Sombat Ratano as he walks alongside his campaign truck with a
   microphone, hailing the voters of a rural village in Ubon Ratchathani
   province. In Isaan, Thailand's poor and populous north-east region,
   support is still strong for Thaksin Shinawatra, the prime minister
   deposed by a military coup in September 2006. Mr Sombat is a candidate
   in the December 23rd general election. He is standing for the People's
   Power Party (PPP), a reincarnation of Mr Thaksin's Thai Rak Thai
   (TRT), which was disbanded after the coup. As he tours the village, he
   drops Mr Thaksin's name at every opportunity, promising to revive the
   policies--from cheap health care to farming loans--that made the
   former prime minister popular.

   Pakistan is not the only Asian country where a dodgy military regime
   is running a general election under dubious electoral rules in the
   hope of keeping out a similarly dodgy civilian whom it overthrew. The
   difference is that unlike Benazir Bhutto in Pakistan, the exiled Mr
   Thaksin is not being allowed to take part in the vote himself, and
   there may be slightly more hope that things will come out right in the
   end.

   Middle-class Bangkokians, who are as snooty about their country
   cousins as any metropolitan elite anywhere, often say that
   "uneducated" rural voters such as those in Isaan were bribed and
   tricked into voting for Mr Thaksin. But rural voters were quite
   rational in handing him landslide victories in 2001 and 2005. He was
   Thailand's first party leader to promise and deliver a comprehensive
   set of policies aimed at the mass of voters. The allegations of
   corruption, conflicts of interest and vote-buying that surround him
   are serious but hardly unusual: such practices are endemic in Thai
   politics.

   The gravest allegation against Mr Thaksin is that in a "war on drugs"
   in 2003 he seemed to be encouraging extra-judicial killings of
   suspected drug-dealers by police. An investigation into this, started
   after the coup, remains incomplete--perhaps because the policy,
   however brutal, was also popular. Amid signs of resurgent amphetamine
   abuse, the PPP unashamedly talks of reviving it.

   On his shirt Mr Sombat bears the logo of King Bhumibol's 80th birthday
   celebrations, held earlier in December. This is a subtle riposte to
   the military junta's accusation that Mr Thaksin and his party do not
   respect the country's revered monarch, whose portrait is as
   omnipresent in the Isaan countryside as it is around Bangkok's royal
   palaces. The PPP has also hired Samak Sundaravej, an arch-royalist, as
   stand-in leader while Mr Thaksin remains abroad. Though close to the
   palace, Mr Samak is a foe of General Prem Tinsulanonda, the king's
   chief adviser and, Thaksinites allege, mastermind of the coup.

   Many parties, old and new, are contesting the election. Some have
   brought military men on board, hoping for army backing. Niran
   Pitakwatchara, a local doctor standing in Ubon Ratchathani for
   Matchimathipataya, one of the new parties, reckons voters have started
   to see the flaws in Mr Thaksin's policies. But all the other parties,
   including Mr Niran's, have adopted copycat versions of them--making
   them awkward to attack.

   The generals who staged the coup claimed to be saving Thai democracy
   from Mr Thaksin's abuses. Their dictatorship has been a pretty mild
   one and they are keeping their promise to hold the election by the end
   of 2007. But they presumably hoped the former leader would be
   forgotten by now. He has not been. Though Thailand's quirky opinion
   polls must be treated with caution, most predict that the PPP will win
   comfortably more seats than its nearest rival, the Democrats, although
   not a majority. The widespread assumption is that the Democrats will
   nevertheless form a ramshackle coalition. The problem is that Abhisit
   Vejjajiva, the Democrats' leader, though young and handsome, may not
   command enough respect to lead a fractious government.

   Until the coup, Thailand seemed to be escaping its historic cycle of
   alternating military dictatorships and weak civilian rule. By the late
   1990s it had become a beacon of multi-party democracy in Asia. Whether
   that beacon will shine again is unclear. If a Democrat-led coalition
   takes office, the PPP seems likely to make its life difficult and
   short-lived. If the PPP leads the next government, a peace pact with
   the generals is possible but the military men are bound to be nervous.
   The PPP promises to rescind a political ban that a tribunal created by
   the junta imposed on Mr Thaksin and 110 allies. If he returns, he
   would be able to scrap the amnesty that the coupmakers granted
   themselves--and put them in the dock.

   General Anupong Paojinda, a new army chief who took over in October,
   insists there will be no coup even if the Thaksinites win. Then again,
   General Sonthi Boonyaratglin, his predecessor, repeatedly made the
   same promise right up to the moment he overthrew Mr Thaksin.

   The generals, courtiers and bureaucrats who have been in charge for
   the past 15 months have ruled dismally. Thailand's economy is now one
   of the slowest-growing in booming Asia. The army-appointed interim
   government has become ever more invisible as its popularity has sunk.
   General Sonthi, presumably fearing humiliation, quietly dropped plans
   to stand in the election. But it is unclear whether the army and its
   civilian backers have learned the old lesson that coups and
   extra-constitutional excursions tend to make political crises worse
   and do not produce good government.

   Thailand's judicial and regulatory institutions are on trial in the
   election. For example, a new Election Commission, appointed with
   little dissent in the turmoil shortly before the coup, faces
   accusations of partiality. It absolved the military junta of plotting
   to subvert the election by undermining the PPP, despite the discovery
   of army documents detailing the plot. But the commission is now
   threatening to disqualify the PPP over the less serious matter of a
   video clip in which Mr Thaksin breaches his ban on politicking and
   urges support for his party.

   The commission and courts will have lots of complaints to handle after
   the polls close. If they enforce the rules impartially and promptly,
   they could set Thailand back on the road to democracy. If they are
   arbitrary, biased or dilatory, they may doom it to more years of
   instability--especially if they leave the impression that the people
   have voted for Thaksinism, only to have their will subverted.


   Corruption, nepotism and impunity threaten the peace process

   IN SEPTEMBER last year a warrant was issued for the arrest of Sitaram
   Prasain, who was accused of stealing $4.3m from his own bank. This
   plunged the partly state-owned outfit, set up to lend to small
   businesses, into insolvency. Yet somehow the police could not find
   him. He seemed invisible, even when many of the country's top
   politicians attended his son's lavish wedding. For many Nepalis, this
   was all too typical of a system where the rich and privileged are
   above the law.

   When the Young Communist League, a squad of thugs run by Nepal's
   Maoists, kidnapped Mr Prasain this month and paraded him in front of
   the press before handing him to the police, there was an almighty row.
   Girija Koirala, the irate prime minister, called them the "Young
   Criminal League". The Maoist leader, known as Prachanda, retorted that
   it was Mr Koirala who consorted with criminals. Ashish Thapa, of
   Transparency International, an anti-corruption watchdog, points out
   that Mr Prasain had given generously to various political parties.

   The Maoists, whose ten-year insurgency ended in a messy truce last
   year, are now partners in an interim government, while the chaotic
   country pursues a permanent peace. Yet the Prasain affair suggests
   that peace needs at least some integrity in public life. Aside from
   short-lived, politically motivated episodes, no one can recall anybody
   important in Nepal ever being punished for anything.

   The Supreme Court itself is bound up in the culture of impunity.
   Earlier this year an unsuccessful litigant released recordings of his
   efforts to win a property dispute through bribery. No action has been
   taken. Yet the judiciary has a vital role in the peace process, both
   in hearing important constitutional cases and in a planned "truth and
   reconciliation" process over the many human-rights abuses committed by
   both sides to the conflict.

   The Maoists, while posing as the party of justice, also look shady.
   There are many reports of their involvement in illegal logging. (A
   Maoist, as it happens, holds the cabinet portfolio covering forestry,
   traditionally seen as a lucrative sinecure.) And there has never been
   a proper accounting for millions of dollars in finance-ministry
   cheques payable to Krishna Mahara, a Maoist leader. The money was
   intended to pay for disarming and demobilising the Maoists' fighters.
   Transparency's Mr Thapa thinks the Maoists in fact have more
   ways--legal and otherwise--to raise revenue than any other party, and
   have amassed large sums of money.

   The police, too, have a big role to play in establishing law and order
   before and during elections due this autumn. Yet listening to a group
   of mid-ranking officers discussing their hopes for juicy job postings
   does not inspire confidence. The luckiest among them might end up with
   a casino on their beat, with attendant opportunities for kickbacks.
   Since Mr Koirala, from the Congress Party, became prime minister last
   year many officers with Congress links have been promoted.

   "It goes to the feudal character of our society," says Devendra
   Panday, a former finance minister who is now a campaigner for peace
   and democracy. "In the patron-client system there is no incentive to
   clamp down on corruption." Nepotism and party bias in appointments
   undermine institutions. "The country is full of incompetent people as
   well as corrupt ones."

   Cynicism about the way things work is all-pervasive--and extends to
   foreign aid. International donors are big providers of good jobs for
   the local elite. Many able young people in Kathmandu, who lack the
   connections, have concluded that only the upper classes need apply. In
   the unhappy villages, where most people live and development is yet to
   come, peasants are quick to assume, rightly or wrongly, that money
   intended for them has been stolen higher up the system. Others contend
   that it is simply wasted by people too rich to understand their
   problems. Such resentments fuelled the Maoists' "people's war". Yet
   the system that breeds them shows no sign of changing.


   Pakistan's role in developing and disseminating nuclear-weapons
   technology around the world has long been known to America, a new book
   contends 

     The Nuclear Jihadist: The True Story of the Man Who Sold the World's
               Most Dangerous Secrets...and How We Could Have Stopped Him
                                  By Douglas Frantz and Catherine Collins
                                                         [0446199575.jpg]
                                                   Twelve; 432 pages; $25
                                                                Buy it at
                                                            [3]Amazon.com
                                                          [4]Amazon.co.uk

                                                                  Reuters

                                  Reuters


   DURING a visit last year to Washington, DC, to try to convince George
   Bush's administration that she was the answer to Pakistan's problems,
   Benazir Bhutto promised to hand over Abdul Qadeer Khan, the former
   head of her nation's atomic bomb programme, who has been living under
   house arrest in Islamabad since 2004. Under Miss Bhutto's rule, Mr
   Khan would be made available for questioning--not directly by the
   Americans, but by the next best thing, the International Atomic Energy
   Agency in Vienna.

   Miss Bhutto is now dead, and it is unlikely that any other Pakistani
   leader in the near future will allow the world to know the full
   details of how a Pakistani scientist came to sell nuclear secrets to
   Iran, Libya and North Korea. The reaction at home to Miss Bhutto's
   proposal was outrage. Mr Khan, best known as A.Q. Khan, may officially
   be in disgrace and forced to live without access to radio, television
   or the internet, but for many Pakistanis he remains a national hero.
   When he was hospitalised last year the prime minister sent flowers.

   "The Nuclear Jihadist" exposes in detail how Mr Khan, an affable,
   mediocre metallurgist inspired by the dream of an Islamic bomb, stole
   nuclear technology from the Dutch laboratory in which he was working
   in the mid-1970s, moved back to Pakistan to build a giant enrichment
   complex to make the bomb at Kahuta in Punjab province, and then
   created a nuclear Wal-Mart to sell the parts to others. The authors
   describe his work as the linchpin of the "second nuclear age".

   Pakistan's progress towards becoming a nuclear power began with Miss
   Bhutto's father, Zulfikar Ali Bhutto, who promised, "If India builds
   the bomb, we will eat grass or leaves, even go hungry, but we will get
   one of our own." As for Miss Bhutto, she told the Americans when she
   was prime minister in the late 1980s that she did not know the details
   of the nuclear device her scientists were developing. If she was being
   truthful, the authors suggest she was close to negligent. She assured
   George Bush senior that she would keep Pakistan from enriching uranium
   to weapons-grade level, and was promptly sold 60 F-16 fighter jets.
   America had sold Pakistan 40 F-16s during the Reagan presidency, when
   it already knew about the nuclear programme.

   The book's most revealing passages are about America's role in the
   affair. The authors argue that successive American administrations
   knew a lot about Mr Khan's activities, but for larger strategic
   foreign-policy reasons, chose to do nothing about them. Mr Khan was
   able to flout international rules on nuclear non-proliferation because
   American policymakers thought that securing Pakistan's assistance in
   defeating the Soviet Union in Afghanistan--and, more recently,
   President Pervez Musharraf's help in fighting terrorism--were more
   important than limiting the spread of nuclear bombs.

   The story of Richard Barlow, a CIA agent who once worked in its
   directorate of intelligence on proliferation, sums up the American
   attitude. Mr Barlow had protested that intelligence was being
   manipulated by the Pentagon to suit the policy adopted by President
   Bush senior's administration of turning a blind eye to Pakistan's
   nuclear development. He lost his job. The authors find Mr Barlow at
   the end of the book denied his state pension, living with two dogs in
   a motor home.

   The one successful recent effort to reverse the spread of nuclear
   technology involves Libya. After September 11th 2001, Libya's leader,
   Muammar Qaddafi, agreed to give up his nuclear ambitions in return for
   better access to western investment and trade. But the authors show
   that even in this instance American and British intelligence agents
   believe enough critical technology remains hidden to allow Libya one
   day to rekindle its programme.

   Douglas Frantz, an investigative journalist and former managing editor
   of the Los Angeles Times, and his wife, Catherine Collins, also a
   journalist, know how to weave complicated material into a persuasive
   narrative. Mr Musharraf has insisted all along that Mr Khan, the
   salesman, was a lone wolf who operated under the radar, and that his
   network has been shut down. The authors argue that this claim is
   far-fetched: there is still plenty of nuclear know-how in the wrong
   hands.
   The Nuclear Jihadist: The True Story of the Man Who Sold the World's
   Most Dangerous Secrets...and How We Could Have Stopped Him.
   By Douglas Frantz and Catherine Collins.
   Twelve; 432 pages; $25 


                                                                       AP

                                     AP

   A Maoist walk-out jeopardises the peace process


   RATHER than lose an election, Nepal's Maoists seem ready to scuttle
   it. On September 18th they announced that they were leaving the
   eight-party transitional government headed by Girija Prasad Koirala.
   They seemed to realise that they would do badly in elections,
   scheduled for November 22nd, for an assembly to draft a new
   constitution. Rather than risk humiliation, they shifted the
   goalposts, making demands beyond the powers of the interim
   constitution.

   That constitution provides for a "mixed election" to the constituent
   assembly, with half the members to be directly elected, and half
   through proportional representation. Expecting to fare better under a
   fully proportional system, the Maoists' leader, known as "Prachanda",
   demanded one be adopted. The interim constitution also promises that
   the future of Nepal's monarchy will be decided at the new assembly's
   first meeting. The Maoists demanded that the interim parliament
   immediately turn the country into a republic.

   The two large political parties, Mr Koirala's Nepali Congress and the
   mainstream Communists, known as the UML, had to decide how much ground
   to give to ensure elections would be held and peace preserved. There
   was talk of seat adjustments to ensure that a dozen Maoist leaders
   made it into the assembly. There were even promises that during the
   election campaign, all eight parties would make public commitments to
   vote for a republic.

   Ever since a popular movement brought an end to the autocratic rule of
   King Gyanendra in April 2006, the Maoists' position has been
   ambivalent. On the one hand, they have submitted to a United
   Nations-supervised "arms management" process--a euphemism for
   demobilisation. And, officially, they have given up their "people's
   war", which in ten years led to some 13,000 deaths, in order to join
   open, competitive politics. On the other hand, they have not equipped
   their cadres intellectually for non-violent politics. Instead they
   have let loose on the populace a corps of thugs, known as the Young
   Communist League. And last month a Maoist plenum saw militarist
   hardliners accuse the moderate leadership of "selling out" the
   revolution. In defensive response, Mr Prachanda and his chief
   ideologue, Baburam Bhattarai, stiffened their demands.

   It has not helped that the eight-party alliance is run autocratically
   by Mr Koirala, an ailing octogenarian in his sixth decade in politics.
   Whether out of choice or infirmity, he is increasingly remote, and has
   alienated his most important democratic ally, the UML's Madhav Kumar
   Nepal. As the Election Commission prepared for polls, the public
   watched nervously to see whether Mr Koirala or Mr Prachanda would
   blink first. Instead, the latter averted his gaze and stalked off.

   The timing of the Maoists' exit is at best irresponsible. Nepal is
   tackling three daunting challenges simultaneously: preparing for the
   first elections since 1999; rehabilitating the victims of the
   conflict; and restructuring the state, with the monarchy probably
   being shown the door.

   Opportunistic violence has flared in many parts of Nepal over the past
   year from historically disfranchised groups asserting their demands
   against the background of abject lack of government. Tensions between
   the people of the hills and those of the plains are worse than ever.
   Other linguistic, religious and regional divides are also being
   exploited. The Maoists' departure from government is likely to
   encourage violent groups, more of which are being established by the
   day.

   Delaying the election also gives King Gyanendra a breather--hardly the
   Maoists' intention. The Nepal Army, which waged a dirty war against
   the Maoists and supported the king's seizure of absolute power in
   February 2005, may also savour the prospect of a descent into anarchy
   and turmoil. It would justify its re-emergence from the barracks,
   where it has been sequestered in humiliation since April 2006. A
   reinvigorated Nepal Army is surely the last thing that the Maoists
   would want.

   There is still hope, however. Despite the fierce speeches surrounding
   their withdrawal, Maoist leaders did not reject the peace agreement
   they signed with the other political parties, nor the interim
   constitution, and have not left the eight-party alliance. At talks
   with the other parties on September 20th a compromise was discussed,
   in which parliament would make some token gesture of support for a
   republic, but leave the final say to the sovereign, elected
   constituent assembly.


                                                              James Miles

                                James Miles

   China's Communist Party, reconsidering Marx's words, is starting to
   wonder whether there might not be a use for religion after all


   "DEVELOP the dragon spirit; establish a dragon culture," urge large
   green characters at the high school in Hongliutan, a poor village at
   the foot of a range of bleak loess hills. Though dragon can be a
   synonym for China, it is a god known as the Black Dragon that is being
   invoked here. Without funds from the Black Dragon's hillside temple,
   in a gully behind the village, the school would not exist. Nor, most
   likely, would the adjacent primary school and the irrigation system
   that brings water from the nearby Wuding River to the village's maize
   and cabbage fields.

   Many local governments in rural China are mired in debt. Recent
   central government efforts to keep peasants happy by abolishing
   centuries-old taxes have not made life any easier for these
   bureaucracies. With their revenues cut, rural authorities have found
   it ever more difficult to scrape together money for health care and
   education. So they are only too happy to allow others to share the
   burden of providing these services--even the Black Dragon, whose
   500-year-old temple was demolished by Maoist radicals during the
   Cultural Revolution in the 1960s. Now officials in Yulin, the
   prefecture to which Hongliutan belongs, give the temple their
   blessing.

   The revival of the Black Dragon Temple's fortunes is part of a
   resurgence of religious or quasi-religious activity across China
   that--notwithstanding occasional crackdowns--is transforming the
   social and political landscape of many parts of the countryside.
   Religion is also attracting many people in the cities, where the
   party's atheist ideology has traditionally held stronger sway.

   The resurgence encompasses ancient folk religions and ancestor
   worship, along with the organised religions of Buddhism, Taoism, Islam
   (among ethnic minorities) and, most strikingly, given its foreign
   origins and relatively short history in China, Christianity. In the
   face of this onslaught, the party is beginning to rethink its approach
   to religion. It now acknowledges that it may even have its uses.

   In Hongliutan the party appears in retreat. It is not the party
   secretary Zhang Tieniu who holds sway. Mr Zhang was the youngest party
   chief in the prefecture when he was appointed last year at the age of
   32. But in a culture that reveres age, some villagers refer to him
   dismissively as a "lad". The man in charge in Hongliutan is
   64-year-old Wang Kehua. Mr Wang happens to belong to the village's
   main clan. He is also the village's elected chief (a post which in
   most villages is subordinate to that of party secretary). More to the
   point, he controls the temple and its money.

   It was Mr Wang's idea to rebuild the temple in 1986, a decade after
   Mao's death. Mr Wang, who had become one of the village's wealthiest
   men by wheeling and dealing elsewhere, donated some of his own money
   and organised villagers to add theirs. It was a promising venture.
   Historically, the Black Dragon Temple had a reputation extending far
   beyond the village. The dragon was renowned in the parched semi-desert
   of the north of Shaanxi Province, 600 kilometres (370 miles) west of
   Beijing, as a bringer of rain. If the temple was rebuilt, people would
   come, pray to the dragon--and spend money.

   Mr Wang does not, however, speak of commercial motives. In the bare
   concrete-walled room he calls his office, he describes how, one after
   the other, the half-dozen villagers who had destroyed the temple in
   the 1960s fell victim to the vengeful dragon in subsequent years. The
   man who had broken off the head of the Black Dragon's effigy (the god
   is worshipped in a human-looking form, as shown in the picture above)
   had his head blown off when a factory boiler exploded. Another bled to
   death after accidentally chopping his foot with an axe. One was
   crushed by a donkey cart. Their offspring also suffered ill fate.
   These events, says Mr Wang, convinced him of the power of the dragon
   and of the importance of reviving its worship.

   The temple has no clergy. Visitors are mainly drawn by their belief in
   the dragon's power to tell the future. Many want to know whether
   business ventures or marriages will succeed. Mr Wang asked the Black
   Dragon whether the divinity approved his appointment as temple chief.
   It did. The dragon's responses are given in the form of obscurely
   worded classical poems written on pieces of paper issued by a
   70-year-old villager, Chen Yushan, clad in his blue padded Mao suit.
   Mr Chen offers his interpretation of what these poems mean. An
   entrepreneur who is told his business will be successful, and who then
   enjoys financial success, is quite likely to make a big donation to
   the temple.

   Turning a blind eye

   Officially, the party regards folk religion as superstition, the
   public practice of which is illegal. But in many rural areas officials
   now bend the rules. In Yulin prefecture, with 3.4m people, there are
   106 officially registered places of worship and many more that are not
   officially sanctioned. Most are not part of the five mainstream
   religions (China regards the two Christian traditions, Catholicism and
   Protestantism, as separate) that the party recognises. But Yulin has
   allowed the Black Dragon Temple to affiliate itself with the
   government-sponsored Taoist Association. This gives it a cloak of
   legitimacy. So too does an arboretum that Mr Wang has planted with
   temple funds (at the dragon's request, he says, but it also helps him
   show officials how the village is contributing to government efforts
   to stop the desert encroaching).

   Local officials themselves benefit from the greater tolerance. For all
   the party's dictatorial ways, government officers are often fearful of
   triggering unrest by enforcing unpopular policies that are not all
   that vital to the party's interests (hence the increasingly patchy
   implementation of population control). Demonstrations in an official's
   jurisdiction can do far more damage to his career than turning a blind
   eye to popular religion--so long as such activity does not directly
   challenge the party.

   There are also more tangible rewards. In his book "Miraculous
   Response", Adam Yuet Chau of the School of Oriental and African
   Studies in London says that temples applying for official registration
   typically have to treat local officials to banquets. Officials, he
   adds, support temples that pay them respect and tribute. They also
   gain financially from taxes levied on merchants who do business at
   temple fairs. Policemen invited to maintain order at these occasions
   are paid with cash, good food and liquor.

   In the view of local officials, Mr Chau argues, temples play the same
   kind of role as commercial enterprises. They generate prosperity for
   the local economy and income for the local government. This is
   especially true of the Black Dragon Temple, which says it attracts
   200,000 people to its ten-day summer fair (the Black Dragon himself,
   villagers say, has also shown up in the form of an unusually shaped
   cloud).

   Evidence of China's religious revival can be seen throughout the
   countryside in the form of lavish new temples, halls for ancestor
   worship, churches and mosques (except in the far western province of
   Xinjiang, where the government worries that Islam is intertwined with
   ethnic separatism and keeps tighter rein). Officially there are more
   than 100m religious believers in China (see table), or about 10% of
   the population. But experts say the real number is very much higher.

   This does not mean that China has embraced religious freedom. Some
   religions--Tibetan Buddhism, Islam as practised in Xinjiang,
   Catholicism and "house church" Protestantism, which involves informal
   gatherings of believers outside registered churches--are still subject
   to tight controls because of the party's fears that their followers
   might have an anti-government bent. A seven-year-old crackdown on
   Falun Gong, a quasi-Buddhist sect that flourished in the 1990s, is
   still being pursued with ruthless intensity. Many Falun Gong
   practitioners, as well as lesser numbers of followers of other faiths
   who refuse to accept state attempts to regulate their religions, are
   imprisoned in labour camps.

   Within the party, however, debate is growing about whether it should
   take a different approach to religion. This does not mean being more
   liberal towards what it regards as anti-government activities. But it
   could mean toning down the party's atheist rhetoric and showing
   stronger support for faiths that have deep historical roots among the
   ethnic Han majority. The party is acutely aware that its own ideology
   holds little attraction for most ordinary people. Given that many are
   drawn to other beliefs, it might do better to try to win over public
   opinion by actively supporting these beliefs rather than grudgingly
   tolerating them or cracking down.

   Pan Yue, then a senior official dealing with economic reforms and now
   deputy director of the State Environmental Protection Administration,
   argued in an article published in 2001 that the party's traditional
   view of religion was wrong. Marx, he said, did not mean to imply that
   religion was a bad thing when he referred to it as the opium of the
   people. Religion, he said, could just as easily exist in socialist
   societies as it does in capitalist ones. He also singled out Buddhism
   and Taoism for having helped to bolster social stability through
   successive Chinese dynasties. Stability being of paramount concern to
   the party today, Mr Pan's message was clear.

   In praise of harmony

   His article angered party conservatives at the time: the party's
   official stance is that religion will die out under socialism. But
   more recently the party itself has begun to put a more positive spin
   on the role of religion. Last April China organised a meeting of
   Buddhist leaders from around the world in the coastal province of
   Zhejiang (it did not, however, invite the Dalai Lama, Tibet's exiled
   spiritual leader). The event was given considerable prominence in the
   official media. The theme, "A harmonious world begins in the mind",
   echoed the party's recent propaganda drive concerning the need for a
   "harmonious society". It implied just what Mr Pan had suggested-- that
   the opium Marx was talking about should be seen as a benign spiritual
   salve. In October the party's Central Committee issued a document on
   how to build a harmonious society, arguing that religion could play a
   "positive role".

   The party's change of tone coincides with its recent efforts to revive
   traditional culture as a way of giving China, in its state of rapid
   economic and social flux, a bit more cohesion. The term "harmonious
   society", which in recent months has become a party mantra, sounds in
   Chinese (hexie shehui) like an allusion to classical notions of social
   order in which people do not challenge their role in life and treat
   each other kindly. It is, in effect, a rejection of the Marxist notion
   of class struggle.

   Officials are now encouraging a revival of the study of Confucianism,
   a philosophy condemned by Mao as "feudal" and which can be
   quasi-religious. Since 2004 China has sponsored dozens of "Confucius
   Institutes" around the world, including America and Europe, to promote
   the study of Chinese language and culture.

   In the countryside the revival of traditional values has needed little
   encouragement. Clan shrines, where ancestors are worshipped, have
   sprung up in many rural areas, particularly in prosperous coastal and
   southern regions. The revival of clan identity (in many villages a
   substantial minority, if not a majority, of inhabitants have the same
   surname, which they trace back to a common ancestor) has had a
   profound impact on village politics. Those elected as village leader
   often owe much of their authority to a senior position in the clan
   hierarchy. Control of the ancestral shrine confers enormous power. It
   is often clan chiefs, rather than party officials, who mediate
   disputes. The shrine will lend money for business ventures--so long as
   the recipient has the right name.

   Where Christianity is a feminist issue

   Ironically, the growth of clan power has helped to fuel the growth of
   Christianity in some parts of the countryside. In a village in the
   eastern province of Shandong, the wife of a former party secretary was
   a Protestant who attended prayer meetings with her female friends.
   Their religious enthusiasm was apparently fuelled by the subordinate
   role of women in the clan. A married woman is expected to revere only
   her husband's ancestors but is excluded from his clan hierarchy. The
   fast growing house-church communities often disapprove of ancestor
   worship, thus attracting women who feel fettered by clan strictures.

   The parlous state of China's health-care system has also given a
   powerful boost to religion. Falun Gong owed much of its success in the
   1990s to claims that it could heal without the need for medicine
   (cash-strapped state-run hospitals usually sell medicines to patients
   at inflated prices in order to boost their revenues). In the village
   of Donglu in Hebei Province, about 140km south of Beijing, Catholic
   nuns have set up a three-storey clinic where they offer ophthalmic,
   dental and pediatric services for what they say is a fifth of the
   price of government-run clinics or private ones run for profit. A
   picture of Jesus is pasted to the wall in the operating theatre.

   An apparition of Mary is said to have occurred in Donglu in 1900 when
   local Catholics were fighting off an assault by members of the
   fanatical Boxer cult trying to destroy their church. This has made the
   village a site of great devotion for Catholics. Every May for the past
   decade, the police have cordoned off Donglu to prevent thousands of
   Catholic pilgrims making their way to the village to celebrate the
   feast of Mary. Many of the pilgrims are loyal to an underground church
   which claims closer ties with Rome than the state-approved Catholic
   church. Yet for all Donglu's sensitivity, the local government appears
   content to let Catholics run the hospital, which is a key public
   service.

   Chinese officials are even urging religious organisations to learn
   from Hong Kong, where religious groups run many schools and hospitals.
   In late November, Ye Xiaowen, the head of the State Administration of
   Religious Affairs which oversees the five officially recognised
   religions, said that religious groups had helped reinforce social
   stability in the former British colony with their contribution to
   public services. The Archbishop of Canterbury, Rowan Williams, who
   visited China in October, wrote afterwards in the Times that there was
   now a sense in China that civil society needed religion, with its
   motivated volunteers. During his trip he remarked on an "astonishing
   and quite unpredictable explosion" in Christian numbers in China in
   recent years.

   The party still mouths its alarmist rhetoric about what it says are
   foreign efforts to use religion as a means of undermining the party's
   grip on power. Yet the appointment of Pope Benedict XVI, following the
   death in 2005 of John Paul II who was seen by China as a more die-hard
   anti-communist, has encouraged tentative efforts by China to restore
   the ties with the Vatican that were severed in 1951.

   Last month the Vatican decided to appoint a commission to handle
   Chinese relations. But progress has been far from smooth. On November
   30th, much to the Vatican's annoyance, China's state-backed Catholic
   church appointed a bishop without the Vatican's prior approval for the
   third time that year. Since 2000 China had done so only with the
   Vatican's tacit assent. In August, however, China released a bishop
   loyal to the underground church, An Shuxin, who had been arrested a
   decade earlier after leading celebrations of the feast of Mary in
   Donglu.

                                                                      AFP
                                                                      AFP

                                   Worshipping behind a shield of incense

   An even more tentative rapprochement is under way with the Dalai Lama.
   Since 2002, China has held five rounds of talks with his
   representatives, most recently last February. But China retains
   profound fears that the Dalai Lama's real intention is to separate
   Tibet, and adjoining areas, from China (see [4]article).
   Notwithstanding the government's suspicions, Tibetan Buddhism has
   acquired a certain chic in Chinese cities in recent years, with some
   urbanites regarding it as spiritually more pure than Chinese-style
   Buddhism, which has strong links to the government.

   Within its own ranks, the party knows that some members practise
   religion even though this is against the party's rules. Falun Gong
   claimed many adherents among party members in the 1990s. In the
   countryside, party secretaries routinely take part in religious
   ceremonies. Mr Wang at the Black Dragon is not a party member, but in
   other villages in the region temple chiefs double up as village party
   bosses. If the party is still trying to keep its members atheist, it
   is fighting a losing battle.

   One result of allowing religion to play a bigger role in providing
   education could be that the party finds its efforts to inculcate its
   ideology among the nation's youth becoming ever more frustrated. In
   Hongliutan, the temple-sponsored middle school attracts many boarders
   from the town--a reversal of the normal flow of village pupils to the
   towns. Thanks to the temple's sponsorship, the middle school's fees
   are half of what they would be at a government school, teachers say.
   With this sort of discount, the popularity and influence of the Black
   Dragon, and other such spiritual beasts, seems certain to spread.


   Indonesia has some worrying radicals but it seems to be following
   Turkey, with Islamists moderating as they get closer to power

                                                                   Magnum

                                   Magnum


   IS INDONESIA, the most populous Muslim-majority country, undergoing
   creeping Islamisation? It is not hard to assemble enough recent
   evidence to give Western Islamophobes goosebumps. In late December a
   mob attacked and burned a prayer house in West Java belonging to
   Ahmadiyah, a sect deemed heretical by some mainstream Islamic
   scholars. Earlier in the month the country's Christian leaders
   complained that Muslim radicals, helped by local officials, had
   carried out a string of attacks on churches. Ten Muslim militants were
   jailed for attacks on Christians on Sulawesi island, including the
   beheading of three schoolgirls. In late November the religious-affairs
   ministry barred a liberal Egyptian scholar, Nasr Hamid Abu Zayd (who
   calls the Koran a "cultural product"), from public speaking in
   Indonesia.

   Behind many recent incidents is a vigilante group, the Islam
   Defenders' Front (FPI), which in September assaulted bars, cafs and
   hotels in Bogor, near Jakarta, accusing them of violating Ramadan.
   Another rising radical force is the Indonesian chapter of
   Hizb-ut-Tahrir, which wants a caliphate to rule the whole Muslim
   world. Last August it gathered perhaps 90,000 supporters in a Jakarta
   stadium. Its leaders condemned democracy on the basis that sovereignty
   lies in God's hands, not the people's. A not dissimilar attack on
   pluralism was made in a hardline fatwa issued in 2005 by the
   Indonesian Ulemas Council (MUI). This same semi-official body recently
   demanded the banning of the liberal Egyptian scholar.

   In 2006 a poll found that one in ten Indonesians supported terrorist
   attacks like the 2002 Bali bombings if intended to "protect the
   faith". Jemaah Islamiah (JI), the terror group behind the Bali
   attacks, is still running several dozen pesantren (boarding schools),
   putting who knows what into impressionable teenage heads. The Bali
   bombers are due to be executed in the next few weeks, possibly
   triggering a backlash by radicals.

   This all sounds worrying. But Indonesia is a huge, varied and complex
   place, and the radicals--even though some have a semi-official
   platform--are a small and not very influential minority. Contrary
   evidence abounds: liberals as well as radicals are making inroads.
   They have won a big battle over a "pornography" law that Islamists
   proposed in 2006. It would have banned bikinis and short skirts, for
   non-Muslim women too, and prohibited the Hindu minority's traditional
   dances. But a public outcry forced lawmakers to strike out all the
   controversial bits--and it still has not passed in parliament. Two new
   anti-terrorist police squads have made much progress in arresting and
   breaking up JI's leadership. There have been no attacks on foreign
   targets for two years.

   As Indonesia democratised after the fall of the (secular) Suharto
   regime in 1998, local authorities gained autonomy and became directly
   elected. Many seized the opportunity to pass sharia-based laws,
   stoking fears of Islamisation. However, Greg Fealy, an Australian
   expert on Indonesian Islam, says these laws, though successful in
   winning votes for the local politicians pushing them, have usually had
   little practical impact. He recently revisited one such district,
   Tasikmalaya, where he found "there were more schoolgirls wearing the
   headscarf but just as much gambling, prostitution and drinking as
   before."

   The formerly separatist region of Aceh was allowed, under a peace pact
   with the rebels, to introduce strict sharia. The move was popular at
   first, says Sidney Jones of the International Crisis Group, a
   think-tank, but there was widespread revulsion when the authorities
   started publicly whipping miscreants. As a result the religious police
   were drastically reined in. Overall, Indonesians seem to prefer the
   idea of living under "God's law" to the practice of it. Indonesian
   Islam has always been distinct from the Middle Eastern kind, infusing
   influences from Hinduism and other religions. This will make it hard
   for fundamentalists to get far, says Muhammad Hikam, a political
   consultant.

   Whereas a relatively small number of fiery militants and
   fundamentalists get most attention, Mr Hikam says that liberal Islamic
   scholars have successfully broken the link between religious piety and
   political Islam. Indonesians seeking a more overt expression of their
   faith, as many do nowadays, can still believe in separation of mosque
   and state. As the 2009 presidential and parliamentary elections
   approach, secular parties have been attracting voters by creating
   Islamic--but not Islamist--wings. The in-phrase, says Mr Fealy, is
   Islam Lunak, "soft Islam". Pollsters are telling politicians that it
   helps to add a mild religious tinge to speeches about social justice
   and anti-corruption. But radical stuff, like preaching an Islamic
   state, is a turn-off.

   Indonesia's two biggest Muslim organisations are Nahdlatul Ulama
   (NU)--whose long-time leader, Abdurrahman Wahid was president of
   Indonesia in 1999-2001--and Muhammadiyah, which together claim around
   70m members. They indeed used to call for an Islamic state. Nowadays
   Masdar Farid Mas'udi, a senior NU figure, says all they mean by an
   "Islamic" state is a just and prosperous one. In some ways the two
   bodies have come to resemble Europe's mainstream Christian churches:
   "Catholic" NU stresses traditional rites and the authority of
   religious leaders, whereas "Protestant" Muhammadiyah stresses the
   primacy of scripture. As with Catholics and Protestants it is family
   tradition, rather than theology, that usually determines which group
   one belongs to. Both now accept Indonesia's secular founding creed,
   pancasila, which preaches religious tolerance (though you are supposed
   to believe in God).

   Moderate success

   Several of the country's political parties began life as the political
   wings of religious movements such as NU and Muhammidiyah. But the
   parties and their parent bodies have drifted apart, even as all have
   mellowed. In recent elections a more religiously conservative group,
   Prosperous Justice (PKS), has gained votes--but polls now show its
   support slumping. One reason is that it backed the pornography law and
   has suffered in the backlash against it.

   Another, admits Zulkieflimansyah, a senior PKS parliamentarian, is
   that it has joined the (secular) coalition of President Susilo Bambang
   Yudhoyono. Its popularity has suffered because of tough policies such
   as cutting fuel subsidies. Mr Zulkieflimansyah sees his party as
   undergoing a desirable process of moderation as it "encounters
   reality". PKS--like longer-established Muslim parties before it--is
   now having to ditch the fire and brimstone to transcend minority
   appeal. Rising younger figures in the party, like him, are more
   comfortable with this than its older generation, who studied in the
   Middle East. In general, the country's larger Muslim parties are
   echoing Turkey's ruling AK party--ditching Islamism while still
   appealing to the pious. Smaller ones still holding to a hard line may
   fare badly in 2009: Mr Fealy reckons that in 200 regional elections in
   the past two-and-a-half years not a single "sectarian" Muslim
   candidate has won.

   Indonesia is, overall, edging away from radical Islamism. But the
   trend is not irreversible, and the authorities must avoid fostering
   fundamentalists by pandering to them. The MUI (the council of mullahs)
   and the FPI (the vigilantes) provide a lesson: both were created, for
   temporary reasons of expediency, by the Suharto regime but both have
   lingered to haunt its democratic successors. Mr Yudhoyono now seems to
   be trying to channel the MUI's radical enthusiasm into issuing fatwas
   against "deviant" Islamic sects like Ahmadiyah. But this only
   encourages the FPI to take up its cudgels.

   Other, more important ways to make sure Indonesia stays on the path to
   democratic pluralism are to keep the economy growing and to boost
   sluggish efforts at reforming graft-ridden public institutions. High
   unemployment provides recruits for communal violence like that in
   Sulawesi--whether or not religion is the spark that ignites the
   tinder. Poverty, combined with disgust at corrupt officialdom, push
   some people towards the Utopian promises of groups such as
   Hizb-ut-Tahrir. In Indonesia, unlike most Muslim countries, the
   ideological struggle between various forms of Islam is being fought
   largely by democratic means. The violent and the intolerant are still
   at the margins and, while the country's steady progress persists, look
   likely to stay there.


   More sex please, we're Chinese cinema-goers

                                                                 ImageNet

                                  ImageNet

   IN A country awash with pirated films featuring explicit sex and
   violence, China's prudish censors risk irrelevance. Their heavy-handed
   treatment of two recent films has sparked a lively debate about
   whether cinemas should at last be allowed to show something racier.

   At present, films deemed unsuitable for children may not be shown to
   adults either. But the censors are under attack. Critics include Gong
   Li, a famous actress and government adviser, who last March appealed
   for a rating system that would give adults more choice. Complaints
   have mounted following the removal of sex scenes from "Lust, Caution",
   a spy thriller by a Taiwan-born Oscar-winning director, Ang Lee, and
   the outright banning this month of "Lost in Beijing", a sexually
   explicit drama by a Chinese director, Li Yu.

   The internet and rampant film piracy mean censors' cuts do not go
   unnoticed. Chinese internet users can readily find websites showing
   the expurgated parts of "Lust, Caution". Uncensored bootleg copies are
   peddled on the streets. The rapid growth of overseas tourism
   frustrates the censors too. The press reports that some Chinese travel
   agents have been offering trips to the cinema to see "Lust, Caution"
   uncut as part of their Hong Kong tour packages.

   The censors initially approved the showing of "Lost in Beijing",
   albeit in a heavily censored form. But just over a month after the
   film's debut in China, officials changed their minds. They accused the
   film company of circulating the censored sex scenes on the internet
   (the filmmakers blamed pirates) and banned the Beijing-based company
   from making films for the next two years.

   Officials have mentioned the possibility of eventually introducing a
   film-rating system, but they appear in no hurry. Communist Party
   conservatives abhor the idea of condoning explicit sex. One Beijing
   newspaper reported last year that officials were worried that a rating
   system would make it more difficult to curb the distribution in China
   of foreign films, many of which fail to meet current censorship
   standards.

   A quixotic attempt by a graduate student in Beijing, Dong Yanbin, to
   sue the censors for cutting the sex scenes out of "Lust, Caution"
   resulted in a predictable brush-off by a low-level court in the city.
   It said that the case could not be accepted unless the student could
   submit an uncensored version for comparison. Mr Dong prudently
   refrained from offering the court a pirated copy.


   Cheerful news from a sad land

   ALONGSIDE the barbed-wire fence of Tuol Sleng, the Khmers Rouges'
   former interrogation and torture centre in Cambodia's capital,
   air-conditioned tourist buses drop off clumps of prosperous-looking
   Europeans and East Asians. They shuffle past the rows of tiny cells,
   some of which have rusting shackles still in place. After a room of
   glass cabinets displaying the skulls of the Khmers Rouges' victims,
   they reach a tacky souvenir shop, selling T-shirts, trinkets and
   plastic flip-flops labelled "Pol Pot sandals", after the regime's late
   tyrant.

                                                                  Reuters

                                  Reuters

                           Tourism can be torture

   In 1975-78, around 10,000 souls suffered unspeakable torments at Tuol
   Sleng. Nowadays, as a "genocide museum", it is a prime attraction in
   the country's booming tourist industry. Until a few years ago, almost
   the only tourists Cambodia got were the fairly small numbers taking
   day-trips to the massive Angkor Wat temple complex in the north. Now
   visitors pour in to the capital, to the seaside resort of
   Sihanoukville and even, now that the roads are being improved, to the
   little-explored countryside. Sihanoukville's airport reopened last
   month to its first scheduled flights since the 1980s and the country's
   moribund railways are to be restored.

   In 1993, as United Nations-sponsored elections signalled the end of
   the civil war that followed the Khmer Rouge regime's collapse,
   Cambodia got only 154,000 foreign visitors. Last year there were 1.7m,
   up 20% on the previous year, and they spent some $1.4 billion, or
   around twice the government's entire tax revenues. A fair chunk of
   this money is trickling down on to the bustling streets of Phnom Penh,
   whose tuk-tuk drivers are doubling their basic fare (for rich-looking
   foreigners) to $2.

   Everything from construction to financial services is booming too.
   Cambodia's clothing factories continue to defy predictions that
   competition from China would kill them. Most important, agriculture,
   which employs two-thirds of the country's workers, is powering ahead,
   encouraged by strong export demand from Cambodia's also-booming big
   neighbour, Vietnam.

   When a bumper harvest boosted Cambodia's growth rate to 13.5% in 2005,
   this was seen as an aberration caused by freak weather rather than any
   lasting improvement in productivity. However, a report from the IMF
   this week shows that farm output has continued rising, and last year's
   overall economic growth was far better than expected, at 10.5%.

   The report forecasts a continuing boom this year, with perhaps 9%
   growth. Better seeds and wider use of fertilisers are helping farmers
   reap more from their rice paddies, says John Nelmes, the IMF's
   representative in Phnom Penh. They are also successfully diversifying
   into other cash crops. "This is the type of growth that brings
   immediate benefit to the poor," he says. Last year the Fund forgave
   the $82m the country owed it, some of which will be redirected towards
   improved irrigation.

   Cambodia is slowly but, it seems, surely dragging itself up from a
   very low base. Perhaps a quarter of its entire population died under
   the Pol Pot regime, including most of its educated people. The
   ineffectiveness of its government is a result of the dire shortage of
   capable people as well as of endemic corruption. Education, health
   services and basic sanitation are still lacking in rural provinces.
   Child labour and child prostitution are widespread. But fast economic
   growth is spreading cheer across the country, from the trendy bistros
   of Phnom Penh's riverfront right out to the impoverished countryside.
   And things could get brighter still: substantial oil and gas reserves
   have recently been found off Cambodia's coasts. The huge potential
   revenues from these could sustain the boom for years to come--so long
   as they are spent wisely.


   World powers suck up to the junta


   THE paranoia, secrecy and all-round villainy of the generals who run
   Myanmar (Burma) provide fertile ground for conspiracy theorists. Last
   month Myanmar restored diplomatic ties with North Korea. On May 15th,
   Russia said it was reviving a stalled plan to sell the country a small
   nuclear reactor. A few years ago, Abdul Qadeer Khan, Pakistan's
   notorious nuclear proliferator, reportedly visited the junta. Join the
   dots and a scary picture emerges: they must be making nukes.

   Entertaining though they are, such theories fall apart on closer
   examination. A new paper by a Myanmar analyst, Andrew Selth, dismisses
   the idea that the junta could produce nuclear bombs in the next
   decade. They lack the resources, expertise and even desire to build
   them: for all the regime's wickedness, it has been a consistent
   opponent of proliferation. The small Russian research reactor may
   achieve little besides satisfying the Burmese generals' desire for
   "prestigious" bits of technology. An earlier paper by Mr Selth
   debunked claims that China is building military bases along Myanmar's
   coast, from which to menace India and dominate the Indian Ocean. The
   xenophobic Burmese regime is too suspicious of China to give it a
   military presence on its turf.

   What really is happening is that China, Russia and another would-be
   great power, India, are scrabbling to do deals with Myanmar's regime.
   Like vultures eyeing carrion, they are salivating over the benighted
   country's rich natural resources. The Burmese generals are in the
   happy position of setting competing powers against one another, while
   enlisting their help in resisting pressure to restore democracy. In
   January, Russia and China--both of which have signed big oil and gas
   deals with Myanmar--vetoed America's proposed censure of the Burmese
   regime in the United Nations Security Council.

   India used to join the West in demanding democratic change. But the
   rumours about Chinese military bases, plus India's own thirst for
   energy, made it forget its principles and start wooing Burmese
   generals with guns and money. This all takes place behind a figleaf of
   "constructive engagement". The junta was said to have been
   dissatisfied with cheap Chinese arms, so India's sales of weapons,
   said to range from artillery to reconnaissance aircraft, will have
   been most welcome.

   The Chinese know they are unlikely to get to use Myanmar as a military
   platform. But by developing the country's oil and gas fields, and by
   building pipelines to Myanmar's Indian Ocean ports, they hope to
   reduce their vulnerability to a blockade of the Malacca Strait,
   through which they import much of their oil.

   However, as India is learning, Burmese generals are unreliable. Two
   Indian energy firms and a South Korean one have spent heavily on
   developing an offshore gas field in Myanmar, only to be
   unceremoniously dumped now that the Chinese have come along waving a
   larger cheque.

   On May 27th the house arrest of Myanmar's pro-democracy leader, Aung
   San Suu Kyi, is due to expire--but the regime is widely expected to
   extend it instead. America and the European Union recently renewed
   sanctions against the junta but neither the West's tough approach nor
   "constructive engagement" has budged the regime. With so many big
   powers slavering to do business with it, the chances of change look as
   bleak as ever.


   Tourists bring back tales of life in Kim Jong Il's grim theme park

                                                                   Corbis

                                   Corbis

                  All of Kim's horses and all of Kim's men


   GLOBAL capitalism has worked many wonders, but where in the free world
   can one see 10,000 children dancing in synchronisation, dressed as
   eggs? Such weirdness makes North Korea, a basket-case state, a must
   for a certain sort of backpacker. Tourist visas have been available
   for years; there is even a Lonely Planet chapter on the country. Some
   2,000 Westerners will visit in 2007--a tiny number, but about four
   times the total in 2002.

   Tours are tightly marshalled so that only highlights such as the "Mass
   Games" performance, home of the dancing eggs, are widely reported.
   Visitors must normally provide references proving that they are not
   journalists. But details are seeping out: blogs, Facebook groups and
   customisable Google Earth maps have made reporters of everyone and
   offer channels for unauthorised news from the closed country.

   Many travellers harp on the propaganda: blocks of flats are topped
   with neon exhortations to "turn a corner in the economy" and suchlike,
   and murals depict hearty workers striding forward, perhaps trampling a
   star-spangled banner or two as they go. At Pyongyang's "Kaeson Youth
   Funfair"--home of the world's most genuinely frightening
   rollercoaster--the crossbow stall's painted targets are of big-nosed
   American soldiers and glowering Japanese. It seems that the tourist
   board realises the ironic appeal of such things: painted replicas of
   some of the most over-the-top bits of propaganda are for sale, and a
   post office does a roaring trade in stamps depicting mighty fists
   crushing Western imperialist aggressors. (Oddly, there is also a
   Princess Diana commemoration set.)

   The patriotic propaganda mainly seems to be in earnest, however,
   especially where the country's leaders are concerned. Portraits of Kim
   Il Sung, the founder of North Korea, and Kim Jong Il, his son and the
   current leader, still beam down from every street corner. One must not
   fold one's Pyongyang Times if a Kim is on the front page, as is
   invariably the case. Even at the "flower show", a regular stop for
   tourists, the entire plant nursery is dedicated to Kimjongilia and
   Kimilsungia, the leaders' respective blooms.

   Every North Korean citizen sports a plastic lapel badge bearing the
   face of one or other of the Kims. A few years ago it was reported that
   production of Kim Jong Il badges was to cease, and factories were to
   churn out only the Kim Il Sung variety. Now hardly anyone wears a Kim
   junior badge. Similarly, paintings of Kim senior outnumber those of
   his son by two to one, and there are no statues of the latter. Kim the
   younger is instead often depicted by the blood-red Kimjongilia
   begonia. The official explanation is that he is simply a modest sort
   of chap. His unfortunate looks may have something to do with it
   (though many North Korean men diligently copy his exotic bouffant
   hairstyle). Or perhaps he is preparing the ground for a successor?

   Most Westerners are put up in a hotel on a river island, an Alcatraz
   of fun that they may not leave unescorted. To keep curiosity at bay
   there is a swimming-pool, a bowling-alley, a putting-green and two
   saunas (one hot; one seedy). But the hotel also provides a
   vantage-point: photos from the top-floor revolving restaurant give a
   good picture of the bleakness of Pyongyang. Most striking is the
   architectural uniformity. American bombs pulverised the city during
   the Korean War, so not much is more than 50 years old--and hardly
   anything has been built since the early 1990s, so stagnant is the
   economy.

   The rooftop view also provides some encouragement. Dotted about the
   city are several blue-roofed halls, a bit like aircraft hangars.
   Inside, away from the eyes of tourists, are experimental free-trade
   areas, where citizens can buy and sell goods for cash, something
   unheard of until recently. The halls are strictly off-limits for tour
   groups but are humming with locals. Though official tours take in
   monuments, museums and mass dances, it may be that these little hives
   of activity are the most exciting parts of present-day North Korea.


   Stateless and homeless, Myanmar's Muslims have been abandoned by
   everyone


   AS UNREST in Myanmar kindled flickering hopes of political change,
   long-suffering refugees in Bangladesh were glued to their radios. They
   hope for a chance to reclaim their land and their dignity. Sadly, they
   may be waiting in vain. Not only are there scant signs of change from
   the repressive ruling junta. But these are also Rohingyas, members of
   a poor Muslim minority never very welcome at home.

   The junta's persecution of Muslims has been extreme. But anti-Muslim
   sentiments have been simmering for centuries in Burma. The
   dark-skinned Rohingyas, who have more in common physically and
   culturally with Bangladeshis than with most Burmese, have always
   suffered abuse.

   The junta has ostracised them, by refusing full Myanmar citizenship,
   calling them only "residents of Rakhine state". Almost all the roughly
   800,000 Rohingyas today are stateless. The military regime routinely
   presses them into slave labour, severely restricts their rights to
   travel and marry, and denies them access to both medical care and
   education.

   In Sittwe, the capital of Rakhine (formerly Arakan), Rohingyas lead
   desperately poor lives. Those not pressganged into road construction
   at meagre wages live by subsistence farming and fishing. "It's because
   we're Muslim," declares a trishaw driver. He says people give work to
   Buddhists. There are many poor Buddhists in Sittwe too. But the
   perception of unfair treatment lingers amongst Muslims, though some
   made common cause with September's anti-government protesters.

   Rohingyas have been fleeing Myanmar for decades. Many mingle among the
   million or so illegal Burmese migrants living in Thailand. And the
   office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR)
   has documented 12,000 in Malaysia, but admits there may be twice that
   number. The largest number has fled to Bangladesh. But the
   Bangladeshis have been reluctant hosts. Citing overpopulation and land
   scarcity, successive governments have forcibly repatriated the
   refugees: 250,000 were expelled between 1991 and 1992, and almost as
   many since.

   Since 1992 Bangladesh has refused to grant the Rohingyas refugee
   status. Only two official UNHCR camps now remain near Chittagong. But
   most of those repatriated to the same dire conditions they had fled
   have trickled back to squat in makeshift shelters and camps just
   across the border. Today around 8,000 live in an unofficial camp
   called Tal. Another 200,000 have settled in the surrounding area.

   Tal was born out of Operation Clean Heart, a 2002 crackdown in which
   thousands of Rohingyas were rooted out of local villages. Frido
   Herinckx of Mdecins Sans Frontires, an aid organisation, describes
   how the police threatened local Bangladeshis with prison unless they
   reported on their Burmese neighbours. Instead of returning to Myanmar,
   thousands of homeless Rohingyas regrouped and settled on a
   30-metre-wide stretch of mud along the banks of the Naf River.

   In Tal as many as 12 people are crammed into flimsy shelters patched
   together from reeds and plastic sheets. Floods regularly inundate the
   camp, and local hostility to the incomers often leads to violence.
   Still, most feel that life there is preferable to the daily
   humiliations suffered in Myanmar. "If I can't even say `this house is
   mine,' how can I live there?" asks one 32-year-old man. He says the
   regime confiscated all he had.

   The government in Bangladesh has recently shown signs of softening its
   policies. It plans to move Tal to a drier and more permanent location.
   Aid workers hope the Rohingyas will eventually be granted Bangladeshi
   citizenship. Most Rohingyas say that if democracy is established in
   Myanmar, they will go back. But the junta is not their only enemy.


   Violator becomes arbiter


   FOUR years of intense diplomacy bore fruit on November 30th when the
   Organisation for Security and Co-operation in Europe (OSCE) awarded
   its rotating chairmanship in 2010 to Kazakhstan. Since the decision,
   made at a meeting in Madrid, Kazakhstan's people have been treated to
   euphoric outbursts by their usually reserved top officials. Kanat
   Saudabayev, the state secretary (government spokesman), credited the
   remarkable achievement above all to the extraordinary wisdom of
   Kazakhstan's people when they elected the "truly God-sent Nursultan
   Nazarbayev" as their president in 1991.

   Such reverence to Kazakhstan's authoritarian head of state may well be
   a precondition of political longevity. But it is hardly what one would
   expect to hear in a country ready to lead a 56-member organisation
   that monitors human rights and elections. Human Rights Watch, a
   lobbying group, said the choice of Kazakhstan would undermine the
   integrity of the OSCE's human-rights principles.

   Indeed, the OSCE itself has so far failed to judge a single election
   in Kazakhstan free and fair. Yet the Kazakhstani leadership has now
   pledged to uphold and to strengthen its principles, in Mr Saudabayev's
   words, "from Vancouver to Vladivostok". Kazakhstan will become the
   first former Soviet republic to chair the OSCE. Dosym Satpayev, an
   independent political analyst, reckons its poor human-rights record
   and spotty democratic credentials were trumped by geopolitical
   calculation and hopes of energy co-operation with the oil-rich
   country.

   Mr Satpayev says that denying Kazakhstan the coveted honour might have
   alienated its leaders and driven it into closer ties with China, with
   which it is already linked through the Shanghai Co-operation
   Organisation, a security forum. Or it might have nudged the country
   even more firmly into the camp of Russia, Kazakhstan's staunchest
   supporter in OSCE decision-making councils. The chairmanship was the
   price paid to keep Kazakhstan on good terms with the West and to avoid
   further antagonising Russia, which is already squabbling with America
   over the course the OSCE should take.

   Whatever happened behind the scenes in Madrid, the political elite in
   Kazakhstan is jubilant that, as it sees it, the country has at last
   been accepted as an equal player in global affairs because of its
   democratic and free-market reforms. However, Marat Tazhin, the foreign
   minister, has stressed the great weight on Kazakhstan's shoulders if
   it is to live up to the OSCE's obligations. He promised a change of
   the election law by 2010 and a freer press. With Kazakhstan facing
   greater international scrutiny, the opposition may at least now have a
   chance to have its voice heard. Even so, Mr Satpayev concludes, "The
   OSCE has won tactically, but lost strategically."


   Scarred by continuing violence, the peace process is in serious
   trouble

   THE arrival of a text message in a political leader's pocket announced
   the latest assassination in the southern Terai plains this week, and
   the news was met with grim exclamations and eye-rolling. Madhav Kumar
   Nepal, leader of a moderate communist party, known as the UML, which
   polled second when Nepal last voted in 1999, does not think anyone is
   going to shoot him. But he will struggle to hold his southern
   constituency if Nepal manages to vote again soon.

   Like most of the country's politicians, Mr Nepal is not yet ready to
   admit that elections scheduled for June are impossible, and will have
   to be delayed until after the monsoon--ie, until October at the
   earliest. But he is willing to discuss this scenario, which most
   people now think is inevitable. The poll, to elect an assembly to
   write a new constitution, is the cornerstone of a peace process
   designed to end a ten-year Maoist insurgency. "Nepal will be entangled
   in complications," he says. "There will be this army, that army,
   creating chaos! A failed government!"

   Many say all this is true already. The southern plains, known as the
   Terai, are home to numerous ethnic-separatist groups with murky links
   to smugglers, bandits and Hindu fundamentalists in India. On March
   21st, supporters of the largest, the Madhesi People's Rights Forum
   (MPRF), killed 29 people, mostly Maoists, near the town of Gaur. The
   victims were raped, burnt, beaten and speared to death. Every day now
   brings news of clashes, bombings, kidnappings and drive-by shootings
   in the Terai.

   A year ago the Maoists were a proscribed "terrorist" organisation, but
   under the peace process they are represented in an interim parliament
   (which their deputies attend with concealed weapons) and consulted on
   government business. Now they say that if the government does not ban
   the MPRF they will wage war to avenge the victims of Gaur.

   Yet one senior official says the government cannot ban the Forum,
   because of the widespread support it enjoys in the Terai. This week,
   he says, the government was aware of several hundred Maoists heading
   into the MPRF's heartland. Besides clashing with Madhesi groups since
   the beginning of the year, the Maoists have repeatedly broken the
   ceasefire in other ways. According to a Western diplomat, around 5,000
   hard-core fighters are hidden outside the United Nations-run camps
   where they are supposed to be confined. Most have enrolled in a new
   goon squad called the Young Communist League. No one believes they
   have surrendered all their weapons. Maoist violence and extortion seem
   as serious as the trouble in Terai. Yet the government and the UN have
   been muted in their criticism.

   At midweek the Maoists were on the brink of joining an interim
   government. The hope is that power will make them act more
   responsibly. But the politicians' hopes of keeping control rest on
   maintaining unity between the seven-party coalition government and the
   Maoists. That will be hard. They blame each other for what is going
   wrong. And to hear the leaders describe one another in private, their
   unity seems as amicable as that of fighting cats trapped in a bag.


   The assassination of Benazir Bhutto seems to assure a turbulent
   election campaign and strengthen the likelihood of an unstable
   government 

                                                                      AFP

                                    AFP


   FOR some time Pakistan has been the main contender for the title of
   most dangerous country on earth. Since the murder of Benazir Bhutto on
   December 27th its claim has been strengthened. People are right to be
   worried. But is the forthcoming, postponed election doomed to be a
   violent shambles? And is the country itself doomed to disintegrate,
   fall into the hands of Islamists or lose control of its nuclear
   weapons to jihadists? Not necessarily. In the short run, at least,
   much turns on the rival interpretations of how Miss Bhutto died that
   day in Rawalpindi.

   It went like this. A clean-shaven young man, wearing a white shirt,
   black waistcoat and sun-glasses, presses through the adoring scrimmage
   around Miss Bhutto. Almost within arm's reach of the sports utility
   vehicle from which the twice and would-be future prime minister waves
   to the crowd, as she campaigns for an election due to take place on
   January 8th, he pauses. Behind him is a taller figure, apparently
   bearded, his face shrouded in a white head-dress. Then the
   clean-shaven man points a pistol at Miss Bhutto, and three sharp
   cracks ring out.

   Viewed in slow motion, on a film broadcast by Britain's Channel 4
   three days after the event, Miss Bhutto's trademark white headscarf is
   flipped up, as if by a sudden gust. An instant later two men standing
   on the back of the vehicle duck their heads and Miss Bhutto slumps.
   Swirling chaos ensues, as a suicide-killer, believed to be the
   shrouded youth, pulls the pin from his bomb.

   If genuine, the film seems to corroborate the first official
   description of Miss Bhutto's murder: that she was shot in the head
   just before a suicide-bomber dispatched himself, her killer and about
   20 others. The leaders of Miss Bhutto's Pakistan People's Party (PPP),
   the country's biggest, concur. The party's spokeswoman, Sherry Rehman,
   who was with Miss Bhutto when she died and then bathed her corpse,
   says she saw entry and exit wounds in the head. But the government has
   since changed its version of the killing. It now asserts that Miss
   Bhutto, whose body was buried without an autopsy, was not shot at all;
   she died, according to the new version, as a result of hitting her
   head on the lever of the car's sun-roof while trying to escape the
   blast.

   Baffling, almost irrelevant, as this dispute may seem, it added fuel
   to four days of violent rioting by PPP supporters, mostly in the
   southern province of Sindh, home of the Bhuttos. Indeed many
   Pakistanis, who are deeply mistrustful of the government of President
   Pervez Musharraf, their recently demobbed ruler, consider this
   revision suspicious. It suggests to them that the government is
   somehow blaming Miss Bhutto for her own assassination--or even
   ridiculing her.

   Whatever the truth, the conviction is widespread in Pakistan that the
   government had a hand in killing her. After all, she had accused a
   cabal of army spies and Mr Musharraf's political henchmen of plotting
   to kill her. And that was before a previous attempt on her life, in
   October, in which two suicide blasts killed more than 140 PPP
   supporters during a home-coming rally for her in Karachi. Her return
   that day marked the end of an eight-year self-imposed exile and the
   start of her campaign to serve a third term as prime minister.

   Within hours of Miss Bhutto's death, Sindhis began to rampage. Angry
   mobs tore through every town in the province, burning cars, looting
   shops, screaming in grief for the unrivalled leader of Pakistan's main
   political dynasty. From within high-gated compounds rang the shrill of
   women's screams. In other provinces the response was less histrionic.
   By the time this first frenzy was over, 174 banks, 22 trains and 13
   electoral offices had been looted or set alight. Over 50 people had
   been killed. The government puts the damage at $200m. Other responses
   were more measured, but also discouraging. On December 31st the main
   Karachi stockmarket, a high-performing symbol of the strong economic
   growth of Mr Musharraf's era, opened nearly 4.5% down. The rupee also
   dived, as capital inflows, on which much of the growth has been based,
   dried up like a desert stream.

   For now, the violence has faded, even if the pessimism has yet to
   lift. On January 2nd it was announced that the election would be
   postponed to February 18th, immediately after the month-long Shia
   festival of Muharram, a time associated with mourning. This followed
   much haggling among the political parties. They had started to
   recalculate their electoral prospects even before Miss Bhutto's corpse
   had been interred on December 28th--at a vast Moghul-style mausoleum
   that she had had built for her father, Zulfikar Ali Bhutto, another
   former prime minister, executed for supposedly sanctioning the death
   of an opponent. In a country where no party can win an outright
   majority, and the army alternately rigs the elections and seizes
   power, political planning is a perilous enterprise.

   Musharraf opts for Fabian tactics

   In the final months of 2007, however, a fairly solid consensus had
   emerged about the outcome of the election. True, Mr Musharraf's
   blundering efforts to retain the autocratic powers he had seized
   nearly a decade ago had brought political turmoil to Pakistan. But
   rough polling, and an assessment of Mr Musharraf's best interests,
   suggested that the PPP and the former ruling party, the Pakistan
   Muslim League (Q), which is loyal to the old soldier, would emerge as
   the two biggest parties, neither of them with a majority. They might
   then have formed a coalition government, which Miss Bhutto plainly
   hoped to lead.

   That result, minus Miss Bhutto, is now the very best that Mr Musharraf
   can hope for. More likely, say some pundits, is that Pakistanis will
   vote in huge numbers for the PPP, in sympathy for its loss. That might
   give the PPP an outright majority, which is no doubt why Mr
   Musharraf's loyalists were so eager to have the election postponed,
   though their demand was ostensibly to allow time to repair polling
   stations and replenish ballot papers. A sympathy vote could boost
   Pakistan's second party, led by Nawaz Sharif. The main rival in much
   of Punjab, Pakistan's biggest province, to Mr Musharraf's loyalists,
   Mr Sharif demanded that the vote be held on time. But the Election
   Commission, supposedly independent but in fact controlled by Mr
   Musharraf, ruled that this was impossible.

   The PPP's new acting leader, Asif Zardari, who is Miss Bhutto's
   widower, will act as regent while his co-leader, the couple's
   19-year-old son Bilawal, completes his studies at Oxford University.
   Mr Zardari had also wanted the vote to be held as planned. In agreeing
   to a delay, he is likely to have won some quid pro quo for the PPP.
   Yet Mr Zardari has meanwhile accused the former ruling party of
   killing his wife, and thereby made clear that the PPP is not to be
   trifled with. With a reputation for corruption and thuggery, earned
   during Miss Bhutto's two terms in power, he has reminded his main
   rivals that the PPP currently controls the streets.

   It is a point worth making. A long delay, the PPP reasonably feared,
   would increase Mr Musharraf's agents' ability to manipulate the
   election in his favour. They have, after all, rigged all the four
   previous polls presided over by their master, who has also staged two
   coups. On December 31st PPP officials announced that Miss Bhutto had
   been due to hand a 200-page dossier on Mr Musharraf's latest
   vote-rigging schemes to some American congressmen.

   Meanwhile, the dispute continues over who killed Miss Bhutto. The
   government says it was al-Qaeda. At least, that is the label it has
   attached to the alleged culprit, a Taliban warlord called Baitullah
   Mehsud, who holds sway over a terrorist haven along the north-western
   frontier with Afghanistan. Mr Zardari, like most Pakistanis, scoffs at
   this. "I think soon the chickens are going to lay their eggs and we
   will blame them on al-Qaeda," he says. "Al-Qaeda has nothing to fear.
   Why would they fear us? Are they our political opponents?"

   Mr Mehsud has denied having anything to do with the killing--in fact,
   he has called for an international investigation into the atrocity,
   though he may have to be satisfied with the announcement that a team
   of British detectives will assist with an investigation into Miss
   Bhutto's death. He is certainly capable of the crime. Last month it
   was reported that he had been elected leader of Tehrik-e-Taliban
   Pakistan, a new association of tribally based Islamist militias in the
   frontier area. Flush with Afghan drug money, and a dream of global
   jihad, these groups have gained unprecedented power during America's
   six-year war on terror. At America's expense, estimated at around $5
   billion, 100,000 Pakistani troops have been sent to quell them. Yet
   they now control a vast and spreading swathe of territory. Mr Mehsud's
   fief, in particular, is reported to have become a hub for Pakistani
   and foreign jihadist terrorists. Intelligence agents say they include
   members of Jaish-e-Muhammad, a Pakistani outfit formerly trained by
   the army to fight in Indian-held Kashmir. This group is alleged to
   have supplied dozens of suicide-bombers for attacks in Pakistan in
   recent months.

   One more unexplained murder

   Miss Bhutto may have been killed by the same men. A Western-educated
   woman, who applauded America's war on terror, she was presumably not
   to their taste. And indeed, shortly before she returned to Pakistan,
   Mr Mehsud was alleged to be plotting to kill her. Similarly, within
   hours of Miss Bhutto's assassination, the government released what it
   claimed was a recording of Mr Mehsud discussing the atrocity over the
   telephone. It features a voice, allegedly Mr Mehsud's, asking who had
   killed Miss Bhutto, then rejoicing to learn that the killers were his
   own men. To some disinterested listeners, however, this sounded
   phoney. Surely Mr Mehsud would have kept closer control over such an
   audacious and meticulous ambush? Moreover, on the tape he is heard
   giving what appears to be a precise description of his position. Why,
   then, had the army apparently not tried to kill him?

   For that matter, it is not entirely obvious that Mr Mehsud would have
   wanted Miss Bhutto dead. There are richer jihadist prizes in
   Pakistan--not least Mr Musharraf, whose removal Ayman al-Zawahiri,
   Osama bin Laden's deputy, has called for. Mr al-Zawahiri had not
   bothered to denounce Miss Bhutto, a discredited female opposition
   politician. Yet the campaign to dispatch Miss Bhutto was carried out
   with an unusual thoroughness and persistence. On the eve of an
   election that her party had a fair hope of winning, it is not hard to
   imagine that Miss Bhutto's assassination was politically motivated.

   Despite the investigation that Mr Musharraf has promised, the truth
   may never out. Pakistan's political history is crammed with
   unexplained killings. They include the violent deaths of Miss Bhutto's
   two brothers, Murtaza and Shah Nawaz, whose bodies also lie in the
   family's meringue-like mausoleum in Garhi Khuda Bakhsh. (Mr Zardari
   was charged with ordering the death of Murtaza in a storm of police
   gunfire in 1996. He was later exonerated.) Another mystery surrounds
   the death of General Zia ul Haq, the dictator who toppled, then
   hanged, Miss Bhutto's father. One day in 1988 the general's plane,
   which was also carrying America's ambassador to Pakistan, fell to
   earth.

   Bring on the doomsayers

   On December 28th thousands of sombre men, black scarves bound around
   their arms, converged on Garhi Khuda Bakhsh. Many had served the lofty
   Bhuttos. Passing the charred carcass of a train and several gutted
   government buildings, they streamed in to see Miss Bhutto buried,
   shouting "Hang Musharraf!" as they came. "This is civil war. It is
   worse than Iraq," said one mourner, Zulfikar Ali Mirza, a black-clad
   PPP stalwart with an assault rifle wedged beside the seat of his car.
   "I see no more map of Pakistan. She was the only link between the four
   provinces. Now there is no future for Pakistan."

   It is Pakistan's particular misfortune that its progress tends to be
   measured against exaggerated doomsday prophecies such as this. Three
   are most popular. The first, which is as old as Pakistan itself,
   decrees that the place will fragment (history is not encouraging: born
   of partition in 1947, the country lost its eastern component in 1971).
   The other two are more recent. One is that Pakistan, like neighbouring
   Iran, will fall to Islamists--perhaps even of Mr Mehsud's vicious
   kind. A related fear is that terrorists will get hold of the country's
   nuclear arsenal. All three nightmares are very unlikely in the short
   term, but may be increasingly possible.

   To be clear, Pakistan is bitterly divided. Punjab dominates the
   economy and the army. In other parts of the country military
   rule--which Pakistanis have known for over half their history--is
   considered Punjabi rule. Every decade or so, in Sindh, Baluchistan and
   North-West Frontier Province (NWFP), Punjabi troops are dispatched to
   quash an insurgency. The army is currently attempting this task in
   both Baluchistan and NWFP, on several fronts. NWFP has always been so
   rebellious that no Pakistani government has dared to call it by its
   logical name, Pushtunistan, for fear of rallying the Pushtun tribesmen
   who live there. But the army is still quite strong enough to prevent
   any chunk of Pakistan from splitting off.

   The other prophecies are more sobering--given the current security
   crisis on the Afghan frontier, and a history of institutional Islamism
   within the army itself. The American-backed campaign in north-western
   Pakistan has gone badly. It has almost certainly spawned much more
   radicalism and terror than it has ended. Baker Atyani, head of the
   al-Arabiya television office in Islamabad, says he receives two or
   three videotapes every week from local and foreign jihadist groups
   along the frontier--many more than he can broadcast. Clearly, Pakistan
   has a long-term problem with militancy. And the prevalence of jihadist
   sympathies within the army also remains a concern. For whatever
   reason, many soldiers on the frontier are demoralised: at least
   several hundred have surrendered to untrained bandits. Nonetheless,
   despite these concerns, a strong majority of Pakistanis remain
   moderate.

   It is right to worry about these, perfectly imaginable, calamities.
   And yet, again and again, governments at home and abroad, civilian and
   military, have let such nightmares distract them from dealing with
   Pakistan's pressing political problems. Force, the army's preferred
   solution, is invariably insufficient to provide solutions. For
   example, so long as marginalised Baluchis, whose vast western province
   is Pakistan's richest in minerals but poorest per person, do not
   receive a fair share of state spending, they will periodically rise
   up. Instead of slapping them down--as Mr Bhutto did in the 1970s, and
   Mr Musharraf does now--the government will one day have to give them a
   fair deal.

   Even in easier times, improving Pakistan's government would be a huge
   undertaking. To get Pakistanis to place the slightest trust in their
   state may take decades. And even the most sensible policies may fall
   short in the end. Pakistan is in a dangerous and unstable
   neighbourhood. It has also been miserably served by its politicians,
   and today the choice before the voters looks as bad as ever before.

                                                                      AFP

                                    AFP

                           Cast votes, not stones

   Yet it is at least abundantly clear that Pakistan's rotten politics
   and vagabond institutions will never be put right by an army dictator,
   including an unreformed Mr Musharraf. On seizing power in 1999, he
   promised to reduce corruption, fight extremism, strengthen civil
   institutions and do a host of other good things. In one or two
   respects, he has scored impressive hits: on his watch, for example,
   Pakistan has enjoyed steady economic policies and some useful reforms.
   But, like all dictators, Mr Musharraf has increasingly subordinated
   his good intentions to his wish to cling to power, with disastrous
   results.

   After his second coup, last November, Mr Musharraf abolished the press
   freedoms of which he had long boasted. He also sacked 60 potentially
   disobedient judges, and appointed many biddable idiots in their
   places. The damage thus done to Pakistan's judiciary, which was rotten
   to begin with, will take years to undo. He has also quietly dropped
   the architect of Pakistan's impressive economic performance, his
   former prime minister, Shaukat Aziz.

   No more generals, please

   Given this record, it is hard to imagine what beneficial role Mr
   Musharraf might yet play, whether he is in uniform or not. He speaks
   of his desire for a "democratic transition". The first test of his
   sincerity will be whether Pakistanis are allowed a fair election next
   month. Then all eyes will be on the kind of government that emerges.
   In a country in a state of shock, predictions are perhaps unwise. Yet
   it seems as likely as not that the PPP and its pro-Musharraf rivals
   will, after all, form a government together, though it is unclear who
   might lead it.

   Disappointing though she was, tainted by corruption and only dubiously
   democratic (she was "life chairperson" of her party), Miss Bhutto was
   her country's only national leader. Pakistan may not have realised how
   much it would miss her, until now she is gone.


                                                            Claudio Munoz

                               Claudio Munoz

   Despite worries about the damage corruption does to the Communist
   Party's reputation, efforts to stamp it out remain half-hearted


   CORRUPTION, Chinese officials often fret out loud, could destroy the
   Communist Party--such is the popular anger it provokes and so at odds
   is it with the ideals the party espouses. Yet frequent crackdowns and
   the occasional toppling of sleazy officials appear to have little
   impact. Nor, many fear, will a new anti-corruption agency, due to be
   set up this year. As they jockey for position before a crucial party
   gathering in the autumn, China's leaders are in no mood for serious
   reform.

   In Shanghai and Beijing, where big corruption scandals involving top
   officials have been exposed in recent months, new cases of alleged
   high-level wrongdoing are still coming to light. In Beijing the
   state-owned media reported last week that Zhou Liangluo, the chief of
   Haidian district, home to many of the city's universities and
   high-tech companies, had been detained for allegedly engaging in shady
   property deals. In Shanghai it emerged earlier this month that Yin
   Guoyuan, a former deputy head of the housing bureau, was being
   investigated for similar reasons.

   Despite the anxious rhetoric, the party is not on the brink of
   collapse. But the scandals of the past few months have stoked debate
   within its ranks and more widely in China about the need for better
   ways of dealing with corruption. Officials have been studying
   anti-corruption agencies elsewhere, notably in Hong Kong and
   Singapore, which rate highly in regional league tables of clean
   government. Singapore's authoritarian tendencies and Hong Kong's lack
   of democracy make them, for some Chinese officials, especially
   appealing models.

   In the build-up to a five-yearly party congress due later this year,
   Chinese leaders have been stressing the need to build a "harmonious
   society". Making officials more honest is portrayed as vital to this
   endeavour. The congress will be the first presided over by Hu Jintao,
   state president as well as head of the party, as China's paramount
   leader. It will be an important opportunity for him to promote his
   supporters and show what he has achieved in five years in power. But
   when it comes to tackling corruption, Mr Hu is hesitant about changing
   the system.

   Few are impressed by plans revealed in February to set up a Corruption
   Prevention Bureau. Its remit remains unclear, but Ren Jianming of
   Tsinghua University in Beijing believes it will not have investigative
   powers. It will probably report to the Ministry of Supervision,
   responsible for standards in the bureaucracy, or directly to the State
   Council, China's cabinet. But Mr Ren says the party's own
   anti-corruption agency, the Central Disciplinary Inspection Commission
   (CDIC), will still decide which top officials should be investigated
   and punished.

   Officials say that the new bureau will help China fulfil its
   obligations under the United Nations' 2003 convention against
   corruption, which requires signatories to have a corruption-prevention
   agency. The convention is vague about what this body should do, but
   says it should be able to operate "free from any undue influence".
   Chinese officials have not spelled out how this will be attempted.

   In the past five years, Mr Hu has done little to make the CDIC less
   vulnerable to the whims of party leaders. The CDIC's action last
   September against Shanghai's Communist Party chief, Chen Liangyu, led
   to his arrest, dismissal and suspension from the Politburo for alleged
   misuse of pension funds. But it raised suspicions that Mr Hu was using
   the commission to settle scores with a rival party faction. Mr Chen
   was replaced last month as Shanghai's party chief by Xi Jinping, who
   is close to Mr Hu. Mr Xi, like a sprinkling of other senior Chinese
   officials, is the offspring of one of communist China's founding
   fathers. Such "princelings" are on the rise.

   Some of China's bolder newspapers have hinted that Mr Hu could be
   doing more to clean things up. They have noted that Vietnam--hardly a
   model of clean government--last month issued a decree requiring
   legislators and senior officials to declare their assets. China
   imposes no such burden on legislators; officials are subject only to
   patchily and secretively enforced requirements to report their
   incomes. Officials have brushed aside proposals by some members of
   China's parliament for a law aimed at ensuring better compliance.
   Frustration with official corruption is one reason why most of China's
   high earners ignored a new rule requiring them to fill out personal
   income-tax returns by the beginning of this month.

   Despite an occasional combative streak, the media hardly ever report
   corruption cases without official approval. It was only this month
   that they reported the arrest by investigators last August of Zhang
   Weihua, the deputy head of a state-run lottery intended to raise money
   for sports, including for facilities for next year's Olympic Games in
   Beijing. An audit in 2005 found that the lottery had diverted 558m
   yuan ($72m) into subsidiaries, which paid some of the money as bonuses
   to staff.

   Mr Hu has tweaked the system a bit. In recent months, during a shuffle
   of provincial leadership posts, he managed to ensure that
   discipline-inspection commissions in the provinces are led by CDIC
   officials from Beijing, or by anti-corruption officials from other
   provinces. In the past these roles have usually been filled by
   placemen of the provincial party chiefs, rendering them useless in
   investigating corruption cases involving the top echelons of the
   party. Even so, the impact of the reform may be limited. According to
   the party charter, provincial commissions must still inform local
   party leaders if they plan to investigate them for corruption.

   The prime minister, Wen Jiabao, has been forthright, at least in
   admitting the extent of the problem. At a news conference last month,
   he said that corruption had been getting "more and more serious", a
   departure from the party's usual line that its clean-up is having some
   success. Mr Wen must have bitten his tongue. In the official
   transcript published by the Chinese press, his remarks were more
   cautious: corruption was only "quite serious" in some places and
   departments. The media did report his unoriginal but far-reaching
   suggestion that one remedy would be more political reform. But there
   is little sign that Chinese leaders are eager to pursue that.


   Long before Commodore Perry got there, Japanese castaways and American
   whalers were prising Japan open

                                         Blackburn Museum and Art Gallery

                      Blackburn Museum and Art Gallery

     IF THAT double-bolted land, Japan, is ever to become hospitable, it
     is the whale-ship alone to whom the credit will be due; for already
     she is on the threshold.

     Herman Melville, "Moby Dick", 1851

   The first English-language teacher to come to Japan landed in a tiny
   skiff, but before he did so, Ranald MacDonald pulled the bung from his
   boat in order to half-swamp her, in the hope of winning over locals
   with a story that he had come as someone who had fled the cruel
   tyrannies of a whale-ship captain and then been shipwrecked. The four
   locals who approached by boat, though certainly amazed, were also
   courteous, for they bowed low, stroked their huge beards and emitted a
   throaty rumbling. "How do you do?" MacDonald cheerily replied. This
   meeting took place in tiny Nutsuka Cove on Rishiri Island off Hokkaido
   on July 1st 1848, and a dark basaltic pebble from the cove sits on
   this correspondent's desk as he writes, picked up from between the
   narrow fishing skiffs that even today are pulled up on the beach.

   Rishiri is about as perfect a round volcanic island, perhaps nine
   miles across, as it is possible for a schoolchild to draw. It is also
   just about as far north in Japan proper as it is possible to be: if
   you start climbing the volcano, the coast of Russian Sakhalin comes
   into view. MacDonald took an intentionally oblique route to get into
   closed Japan. And indeed, the locals who approached MacDonald were not
   Japanese at all, but rather the supremely hairy Ainu, whose women
   tattooed their upper lip.

   The Ainu were the original inhabitants of much of northern Japan,
   while related groups had long settled Sakhalin and Kamchatka. One
   19th-century British explorer and naval captain, Henry Craven St John,
   described the fair-skinned Ainu as "something like a strange drop of
   oil in the Ocean, being surrounded by Mongols [including Japanese] yet
   not one of them." But just as European settlers were pushing the
   American frontier westwards--MacDonald himself was born in present-day
   Oregon of Princess Raven, favourite daughter of the Chinook king, and
   a Scottish fur trader with the Hudson's Bay Company--so the Japanese
   were pushing north. Modern-day Hokkaido (literally, the way to the
   northern seas) was then known as Ezo, whose written characters connote
   wildness and barbarity. Today, only vestigial communities of Ainu
   survive.

   Far from fleeing a tyrant, MacDonald had in fact had to plead with a
   concerned captain of the Plymouth, a whaler out of Sag Harbour, New
   York, to be put down in the waters near Japan. MacDonald had an
   insatiable hunger for adventure, and the desire to enter
   Japan--tantalisingly shut to the outside world--had taken a grip on
   him. Both men knew of the risks, but the captain was less inclined to
   discount them. For 250 years, since the Tokugawa shogunate kicked
   Christian missionaries and traders out, only a tightly controlled
   trade with the Netherlands and China was tolerated in the southern
   port of Nagasaki, with a further licence for Koreans elsewhere. Though
   British and Russian ships had from time to time prodded Japan's
   carapace, an edict in 1825 spelled out what would happen to uninvited
   guests "demanding firewood, water and provisions":

     The continuation of such insolent proceedings, as also the
     intention of introducing the Christian religion having come to our
     knowledge, it is impossible to look on with indifference. If in
     future foreign vessels should come near any port whatsoever, the
     local inhabitants shall conjointly drive them away; but should they
     go away peaceably it is not necessary to pursue them. Should any
     foreigners land anywhere, they must be arrested or killed, and if
     the ship approaches the shore it must be destroyed.

   Two decades later the despotic feudalism of the Tokugawa shogunate was
   under greater strain. At home the land had been ravaged by floods and
   earthquakes, and famines had driven the dispossessed and even samurai
   to storm the rice warehouses of the daimyo, the local lords. Abroad,
   Western powers were making ominous inroads. After the opium war of
   1840-42 China ceded Hong Kong to Britain. Meanwhile, thanks to a
   growth in whaling and trade with China, the number of distressed
   Western vessels appearing along Japan's shores was increasing.
   Moderate voices made themselves heard within the government. A new
   edict was softer:

     It is not thought fitting to drive away all foreign ships
     irrespective of their condition, in spite of their lack of
     supplies, or of their having stranded or their suffering from
     stress of weather. You should, when necessary, supply them with
     food and fuel and advise them to return, but on no account allow
     foreigners to land. If, however, after receiving supplies and
     instructions they do not withdraw, you will, of course drive them
     away.

   MacDonald knew the risks, and approached Japan obliquely in order to
   minimise them. Even so, he spent the next ten months in captivity.

   Ocean streams

   MacDonald's curiosity about Japan had first been aroused as a child,
   with the arrival in 1834 of three Japanese castaways. More than a year
   earlier a full Japanese crew had set off in the Hojun-maru from the
   port of Toba with a cargo of rice and ceramics intended as annual
   tribute for the shogun up the coast in Edo (modern-day Tokyo). Very
   quickly they were blown offshore by a sudden autumn storm. Fourteen
   months later the crippled junk and its survivors were washed ashore on
   Cape Flattery, in current-day Washington state, along with the bales
   of rice and boxes of fine porcelain. A delighted band of Makah Indians
   seized what they could of the cargo and enslaved the survivors. The
   Hudson's Bay Company, who traded with the Makah, found the sailors and
   bought them.

   Seafarers from the isles of Japan have been drifting eastwards in
   crippled vessels for hundreds of years, and perhaps millennia.
   Presumably, they mingled blood if they survived along the
   way--MacDonald himself felt he might be a recipient.

   Their conveyor belt was the Kuroshio (Black) Current, named after the
   deep colour of its waters. The Kuroshio is the north Pacific's Gulf
   Stream, for it brings warm water from the tropics up east of Taiwan,
   north-eastwards along the Japanese coast and on towards the polar
   regions, sweeping east below the Aleutian isles and down the American
   coast (see map). To this day Japanese fishing floats and even monks'
   wooden sandals are washed up on the shores of the Pacific Northwest.
   Katherine Plummer in "The Shogun's Reluctant Ambassadors: Japanese Sea
   Drifters in the North Pacific" (Oregon Historical Society, 1991)
   relates the case of the ghost ship Ryoei-maru, a motorised but
   stricken coastal fishing boat found off Vancouver Island in 1927 with
   the parched corpses of the crew on board and a poignant diary of their
   last days.

   So tyrannically did the Tokugawa shogunate wish to deny its subjects
   outside knowledge that it was not just foreign sailors on the coast
   who risked punishment. Japanese sailors were not allowed to leave the
   country. They knew that if ever they were shipwrecked on foreign
   shores, then they were barred from returning to Japan. Some survivors
   came back regardless: sometimes a Russian ship would put them down
   among the Kurile Islands in a baidarka, a local canoe, loaded with
   provisions; the sailor would then make his way alone to Ezo. Others
   came back to Nagasaki via China on Chinese junks, with the help of
   Western missionaries, but if execution did not always follow, a stiff
   and lengthy interrogation certainly did.

   Tokugawa xenophobia increased the risks of wreck or drift. To prevent
   sailors going abroad, shipbuilding rules restricted the seaworthiness
   of Japanese vessels. The coastal traders that brought grain and other
   tribute to Edo were in essence overloaded arks. They lacked stability.
   The wind caught their high sterns, hampering manoeuvrability.
   Meanwhile, they lacked the sturdy centre-mounted rudders of Chinese
   junks or Western craft, and Japanese rudders mounted to one side
   snapped readily in heavy seas, just when the craft most needed
   steerage.

   To reduce the risk of foundering in a storm, the crew of a rudderless
   craft would cut down the mast, turning their vessel into a hulk, at
   the mercy of wind and waves. The crews of such stricken ships tended
   to turn spiritual. In 1813, according to a later account by the
   captain, Jukichi, the crew of Tokujo-maru, blown off-course for Edo
   with a cargo of rice, cut their top-knots as an act of purification,
   and one crew member shaved his head to become a monk. They prayed to
   Buddhist and Shinto gods (every vessel carried a shrine), and they
   prepared divination papers to find out where they were. After a year
   and a half of drifting, during which most of the crew died, three
   survivors were picked up by a British ship off the coast of
   California.

   Jukichi, reckoned to be the first recorded Japanese to land in
   America, returned home four years later, via Alaska and Kamchatka, and
   spent the first night in the village temple, as he had promised the
   gods. He spent the rest of his life begging funds for the memorial
   stone he had promised his crew.

   The shogunate's hungry demand for tribute, which forced many vessels
   to set sail after the autumn rice harvest, no doubt increased the
   number of sea-drifters: that there was a word for them, hyoryumin,
   attests to their number. The plentiful supply of krill at the point
   where the warm waters of the Kuroshio meet Arctic waters, which
   attracted whales, no doubt increased the number of hyoryumin picked up
   by Western ships. A whaler from Brighton, Massachusetts, is reckoned
   to have been the first in Japanese waters, in 1820, when it came upon
   a pod of sperm whales. A year later 30 American ships cruised around
   Japan, and by 1839 the number of Western whalers had grown to 550,
   four-fifths of them American. It was off Japan, of course, that
   Captain Ahab lost his leg ("dismasted") to the great white whale that
   was his nemesis, and in Herman Melville's imagination the mystery and
   danger of Moby Dick is fused with the land around which he swims.

   As the north Pacific became more crowded, some of the Japanese
   sea-drifters were bound to help unlock the double-bolted land even
   before Commodore Matthew Perry steamed into Edo Bay in 1853 demanding
   recognition for the United States. One such was Otokichi, the youngest
   of the three found enslaved near Cape Flattery. The Hudson's Bay
   Company factor had sent the crew to London, with a notion that they
   might be used as a means to open up trade with Japan. They were then
   shipped to Macau, where they helped Karl Gutzlaff, an indefatigable
   missionary with a Hong Kong street still named after him, to translate
   St John's gospel into Japanese. They hoped to return to Japan in an
   American trader, but the vessel met with cannon fire in Edo Bay and
   Kagoshima. Rebuffed, they resumed their life in Macau.

   Otokichi went on to Shanghai to work for a British trading company,
   married an Englishwoman--perhaps the first Japanese to do so--and
   prospered; after her death he married an Indian. As a British subject,
   John Matthew Ottoson was to return twice to Japan, the second time
   with the Royal Navy in 1854, to act as translator during the
   negotiations that opened Japan up to British trade. He is buried in
   the Japanese Cemetery in Singapore.

   Manjiro, who made it back

   The most famous sea-drifter is known in the West and even Japan as
   John Manjiro. Two days after Melville set off in early 1841 from
   Fairhaven, Massachusetts, on the whaling adventure that provided the
   material for "Moby Dick", Manjiro, the youngest of five crew, set out
   fishing near his village of Nakanohama on the rugged south-western
   coast of Shikoku, one of Japan's four main islands. On the fourth day,
   the skipper saw black clouds looming and ordered the boat to be rowed
   to shore. It was too late. Over two weeks they drifted east almost 400
   miles, landing on Torishima, a barren volcanic speck whose only
   sustenance was brackish water lying in puddles and nesting seabirds.
   In late summer even the albatrosses left. After five months, while out
   scavenging, Manjiro saw a ship sailing towards the island.

   The castaways' saviour, William Whitfield, captain of the John
   Howland, a Fairhaven whaler, took a shine to the sparky lad. In
   Honolulu he asked Manjiro if he wanted to carry on to Fairhaven. The
   boy did, studied at Bartlett's Academy, which taught maths and
   navigation to its boys, went to church and fell for local girls. He
   later signed on for a three-year whaling voyage to the Pacific, and
   when he returned, joined a lumber ship bound round Cape Horn for San
   Francisco and the California gold rush. He made a handsome sum and
   found passage back to Honolulu.

   By early 1851--the year of "Moby Dick" and two years before Commodore
   Perry turned up--Manjiro was at last back in Japan, and things were
   already changing. He and two of the original crew had been dropped in
   their open sailing boat by an American whaling ship off the Ryukyu
   Islands. They were taken to Kagoshima, seat of the Satsuma clan. The
   local daimyo, Shimazu Nariakira, grilled Manjiro, but the tone was
   inquisitive more than inquisitorial: please to explain the steamship,
   trains, photography, etc. In Nagasaki, Manjiro had to trample on an
   image of the Virgin and child. He was asked whether the katsura bush
   could be seen from America growing on the moon. He described America's
   system of government, the modest living of the president and how New
   Englanders were so industrious that they used their time on the
   lavatory to read. Amazingly, he dared criticise Japan's ill-treatment
   of foreign ships in need of wood and water, and made a heartfelt plea
   for the opening of Japan, going so far as to put the American case for
   a coal-bunkering station in Japan to allow steamships to cross the
   Pacific from California to China.

                                              Leeds Museums and Galleries

                        Leeds Museums and Galleries

   Rather than being kept in prison, he was freed to visit his mother--in
   Nakanohana she showed him his memorial stone--and was even made a
   samurai. In Tosa (modern-day Kochi), he taught English to men who were
   later influential during the overthrow of the shogunate and the
   establishment of constitutional government in the Meiji period, from
   1860. During negotiations in 1854 with Perry, Manjiro acted as an
   interpreter. Later, in 1860, he joined the first Japanese embassy to
   America. But as Christopher Benfey explains in "The Great Wave: Gilded
   Age Misfits, Japanese Eccentrics and the Opening of Old Japan" (Random
   House, 2003), if the terror of being lost at sea was the defining
   experience of Manjiro's life, then his greatest gift to the Japanese
   was his translation of Nathaniel Bowditch's "The New American
   Practical Navigator", known to generations of mariners as the
   "seaman's bible".

   As for Ranald MacDonald, though he was handed over by the Ainu and
   taken by junk to Nagasaki for interrogation, he was treated decently.
   With a respectable education and a gentle presence, he was clearly a
   cut above the usual rough-necked castaway, and he was put to teaching
   English. Some of the students who came to his cell later flourished as
   interpreters and compilers of dictionaries. The most notable, Einosuke
   Moriyama, served as the chief translator in Japan's negotiations with
   Perry, as well as interpreter to America's first consul to Japan,
   Townsend Harris.

   In the spring of 1849 the American warship Preble arrived in Nagasaki,
   its commander, James Glynn, ignoring the imprecations from assorted
   Japanese craft to "go away, go away". The American government had
   heard that the Lagoda, an American whaler, had been wrecked on the
   Japanese coast and a number of crew taken prisoner. (Historians now
   think the crew, whose numbers had diminished in prison through
   sickness and a suicide, were deserters.) The Preble was dispatched
   from Hong Kong to rescue them, the government thinking no doubt this
   was also a useful exercise in testing Japan's exclusionary resolve. To
   Glynn's surprise, he learnt that MacDonald, who had been presumed
   dead, was also in Nagasaki. The Preble carried the exultant adventurer
   to Macau, where he promptly signed on a ship that took him to
   Australia's goldfields.

   A secret no more

   Very soon after, Japan opened to the world. Its adoption of
   industrialisation and Western constitutional government was perhaps
   the most abrupt transformation of a country in history. That is well
   recorded. Less noticed was the change to sailors around Japan's
   coasts. Yet St John, the British explorer, relates a foreign shipwreck
   on Hokkaido just two decades after MacDonald left Nagasaki. The
   captain of the Eliza Corry was found by locals close to death on the
   shore. In short order, they made European clothes for him, even
   finding him a wide-awake hat. A table, fork and small and large spoon
   were fashioned for him, while a junk, dispatched in a hurry, returned
   with three Californian apples and three sheets of foreign notepaper to
   complete his contentment.

   As for whaling around Japan, vestigial echoes reverberate. Every
   northern winter, Japan faces barbs for sending a whaling fleet into
   Antarctic waters. And why, asks the mayor of Taiji, a small whaling
   port, should Japanese ships have to go so far, suffering international
   outrage? Because, he says, answering his own question, the Americans
   fished out all the Japanese whales in the century before last.


   Neither very peaceful, nor in process

   A MONTH after the abduction of a journalist, Birendra Sah, in the
   district of Bara in southern Nepal, three Maoist parliamentarians this
   week announced the findings of their own inquiry into the affair. They
   concluded that two local Maoist officials had shot Mr Sah dead, on the
   orders of their local superior but outside party policy. This followed
   weeks of obfuscation from the Maoist leadership and the government and
   came after Mr Sah's weeping wife appeared in public in Kathmandu.

   Although last year's peace agreement officially ended the Maoist
   insurrection, abductions, threats and violence have continued. The
   Terai, the southern plain, is now the most violent part of Nepal.
   Perpetrators include the Maoists, a string of new militant and
   criminal groups, and the army and police. There are now more than 20
   Terai factions, mostly claiming to espouse the rights of the
   marginalised southern peoples known as Madhesis. The daily litany of
   violence recalls the war years. In recent days a youth was burnt to
   death, a local politician had his throat slit and a bomb in the town
   of Birgunj killed one person.

   The backdrop to this violence is renewed political stalemate. In
   October elections to a constituent assembly, planned for this month,
   were postponed indefinitely. The Maoists had earlier walked out of the
   interim cabinet. They had a long series of new demands, notably a
   system of proportional representation for the elections, and the
   immediate abolition of the monarchy.

   The political limbo feeds the violence. It is rooted in the
   minorities' sense of continued discrimination; the politicians'
   obsession with short-term political gain; and the Maoists' failure so
   far to accept peaceful, competitive politics. As the Maoists struggle
   to overcome internal divisions between hardliners and pragmatists,
   their Young Communist League has revived their old system of parallel
   government and rough justice.

   Many other questions remain unresolved. The United Nations mission in
   Nepal, UNMIN, is concerned about the prolonged confinement of former
   Maoist fighters in 28 camps. This week UNMIN's head, Ian Martin,
   offered to discuss a long-term solution for them and the Nepal Army,
   which under the peace accord is meant to become more inclusive. The
   army's hardliners, however, resent any hint of UN involvement.


   Having successfully ousted a king, Nepal is still looking for peace 

   JUST four months after huge demonstrations forced King Gyanendra to
   relinquish absolute power, protest has become a way of life in Nepal.
   Its latest success came on August 20th, when, after violent
   demonstrations in Kathmandu and elsewhere, the government rescinded
   its attempt to raise the prices of kerosene, diesel and petrol.
   Unfortunately, the goal that motivated many to join the original
   revolt earlier this year is proving harder to reach: a lasting peace
   in the ten-year civil war with Maoist insurgents.

                                                                       AP

                                     AP

                     Prachanda the potential Octobrist

   Still, it seems tantalisingly close. The Maoists are observing a
   ceasefire, and in June agreed to join an interim government with the
   seven-party alliance of democratic parties that backs Girija Prasad
   Koirala, the prime minister. There would then be elections--as early
   as next April--to an assembly to draft a new constitution. This month
   the Maoists accepted that their fighters would be confined to
   cantonments, where the United Nations would monitor them. The
   government's army would be confined to its barracks. A beefed-up
   United Nations presence, to be led by Ian Martin, a veteran of the
   transition in East Timor, and now head of a much-praised UN
   human-rights operation in Nepal, is to be announced shortly.

   Every element of this seemingly neat arrangement, however, is
   uncertain. The parties, for example, are loth to let the Maoists join
   the government until they have disarmed. But so far they have not even
   agreed to be separated from their weapons in the cantonments. "Unless
   and until this reactionary, cruel, ruthless royal army is disbanded,"
   says Dev Gurung, a senior Maoist negotiator, "the people will still
   need their weapons."

   Some of the democratic politicians, such as Prakash Saran Mahat, a
   former foreign minister, agree that the army remains a threat, albeit
   a subdued one. However, he says, "it could stage a coup, but not
   create problems at the grass roots." The Maoists could do the latter.
   Their leader, Pushpa Kamal Dahal, better known as Prachanda, has said
   he has 30,000-35,000 soldiers, who would be confined, and a further
   100,000 militia members, who would not. Since these are responsible
   for much intimidation and extortion in the countryside, they might
   make it hard to hold free and fair elections.

   Next, there are fundamental disagreements over the formation of an
   interim government and a body to replace the parliament. The Maoists
   want the interim constitution to declare Nepal a republic, rather than
   let the constituent assembly decide that. But among the parties, there
   is still some support for a ceremonial role for the monarchy. One of
   the big mainstream parties, known as the UML (for Unified
   Marxist-Leninist), has suggested that a referendum on the role of the
   king be held simultaneously with the assembly elections. Its leader,
   Madhav Kumar Nepal, claims that Prachanda, who insists the monarchy is
   already "suspended", agrees with this.

   Also troubling is the Maoist insistence that the interim constitution
   reflect "ethnic federalism"--ie, a division into autonomous regions.
   Mr Gurung says the model would be a "multinational country, like
   Switzerland". But Nepal's complex mix of ethnic groups defies
   geographical division. Resentments kept in check by the monarchy and
   then civil war are already re-emerging.

   While optimists hope Nepal will become a Himalayan Switzerland, a
   gloomier assessment, from the American ambassador, James Moriarty,
   compared the country to Russia between February and October 1917. The
   Maoists, critics say, have not stopped recruiting fighters. According
   to Subodh Pyakurel, who runs INSEC, a human-rights group, they have
   abducted more than 300 people since April, and extortion is rampant.
   Prachanda himself has threatened an "October Revolution" if talks with
   the parties fail. The best hope, in the judgment of many dealing with
   him, is that, given a choice, he would prefer to keep talking than
   resume fighting.


   The chief minister wins again


   THE teetotal state of Gujarat, in the west of India, has once again
   revealed a taste for a strong political brew. On December 23rd a vote
   count showed that the state's chief minister, Narendra Modi, romped
   home to another big victory in elections to the state assembly held
   earlier that month. Mr Modi, a member of the Hindu-nationalist
   Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP), was already the most controversial
   figure in Indian politics. He may now become one of the most
   influential.

   Once the size of Mr Modi's win was confirmed--the BJP carried 117 out
   of 182 seats--it became hard to remember why anyone thought he might
   lose. But the Congress party had raised its hopes, if not its game, in
   this campaign. Sonia Gandhi, the party's leader, crossed swords with
   him. The leaders of two powerful Gujarati castes, the Patels and the
   Kolis, had fallen out with him (at least until he won). And some of
   the party's foot-soldiers also resented a leader who owes more to a
   personality cult than to them. As Mr Modi's supporters donned smiling
   "Modi" masks, some of the rank-and-file grumbled that no one was
   bigger than the party.

   Mr Modi had won the previous election, in 2002, in special
   circumstances, just ten months after 58 rail passengers, many of them
   Hindu activists, died in a blaze blamed on a Muslim mob. The
   anti-Muslim sentiment unleashed by that incident--up to 2,000 people
   were killed in the pogrom that followed--helped sweep Mr Modi to
   victory.

   Since then, the state's Muslims have "learned to live with downcast
   eyes", as a report by one local lobby group puts it. But the rest of
   the state has its head up and its chest out. Always prosperous and
   enterprising, Gujarat is now booming. Its voters clearly credit some
   of this prosperity to Mr Modi's administration, which is notably less
   venal and ineffectual than those Indians in most other states have to
   endure.

   India's nightmare is that the millions left behind by its new
   prosperity might lash out, turning to Maoist violence. But equally
   sinister is the prospect of its aspirant classes casting their lot
   with a business-friendly strongman who promises to make the proverbial
   trains run on time and to keep disaffected minorities in check.

   The BJP is short of "tall" leaders. L.K. Advani, its candidate for
   prime minister, is 80. The party's president, Rajnath Singh, has made
   little impression: no one is wearing masks made in his likeness. Mr
   Modi, on the other hand, has attracted intelligent and ambitious
   strategists, such as Arun Jaitley, who would not waste their talents
   on him if they thought him no more than a provincial demagogue.

   But his campaign, so successful within the state, may have done some
   damage to his larger ambitions. His frequent appeals to Gujarati
   chauvinism jar outside the state, and he struggled to maintain decorum
   when provoked. After Mrs Gandhi's reference to "merchants of death"
   was taken as an allusion to his alleged connivance in the 2002 pogrom,
   his defiant response appeared to justify a notorious 2005 murder by
   policemen in his state. The exchange earned both leaders a reprimand
   from India's Election Commission. This populism may win votes. But the
   BJP must also remain acceptable to a coalition of parties if it is
   once again to head a national government. Mr Advani has had to soften
   his image to lead his party. If Mr Modi is ever to succeed him, he too
   will need to try on a different mask.


                                                                    Panos

                                   Panos

   The slum-dwellers of Dharavi are green

   LIKE Hindu souls, disposable plastic cups are many times reborn in
   Dharavi. In a spiralling continuum, they are discarded and gathered
   in, melted down to their polypropylene essence, and re-moulded in some
   new plastic form. Recycling is one of the slum's biggest industries.
   Thousands of tonnes of scrap plastic, metals, paper, cotton, soap and
   glass revolve through Dharavi each day.

   Location is the key to this. Until two decades ago, the slum was next
   door to Bombay's biggest rubbish tip. This provided a livelihood for
   thousands of local dalits, for whom "ragpicking"--scavenging on
   society's leftovers for anything of salvageable value--is a
   traditional employment. The tip has since been shifted outside the
   city. So too, for want of space, have many of Dharavi's recycling
   units. Yet the roughly 6,000 tonnes of rubbish produced each day by a
   swelling Mumbai continues to sustain an estimated 30,000 ragpickers,
   including many residents of Dharavi. The slum is also host to some 400
   recycling units.

   To a devout low-caste Hindu, the recycling process might offer solace,
   for through its gyrations rejected goods come back in new and valuable
   forms. At the first turn of the wheel is Ravi, a scavenger waiting
   outside a garbage wholesaler to unload his day's labour--a sack of
   paper and plastic plucked from Dharavi's rancid alleys. Ravi is
   balding, has rotten teeth and reckons he is 35.

   He says he arrived in Mumbai from Nagpur, Maharashtra, about 25 years
   ago, after fleeing a cruel stepmother. The journey took him a bit over
   three years, most of which he spent in prison; he was arrested aboard
   a train leaving Nagpur for travelling without a ticket. Since he got
   to Mumbai, he has spent every night on a nearby railway platform, and
   his days scavenging. Earning around 20 rupees (50 cents) per kilo of
   plastic litter, Ravi makes between 50 and 100 rupees a day--of which
   he aims to send 1,200 rupees a month to his younger sister in Nagpur.
   He has not been home, or seen her, since running away as a child. He
   explains this act of almost incredible selflessness thus: "I have no
   attachment to anyone except my sister."

   The wholesaler will rebag Ravi's plastic and sell it to a sorter for
   25 rupees a kilo. The recycling wheel turns again in a gloomy hutment
   in Jalil Compound in western Dharavi. In a blur of grubby hands, a row
   of five squatting youths rake a pile of plastic litter--bottle tops,
   machine parts and broken toys--between them, sorting it according to
   quality and colour. First in line is Mumtaz Ahmed, whose
   responsibility it is to pick out high-grade, thickly moulded plastic.
   A semi-schooled 18-year-old, who arrived from Uttar Pradesh six months
   ago, Mr Ahmed earns 100 rupees a day.

   The sorted plastic is ground into flakes, and sold to a
   granule-maker--such as Nausheed Khan, a tall and dapper Dharavi-born
   businessman. In his factory, the plastic flakes are washed, melted,
   squeezed into hard brown wires, then chopped into pellets. A local
   bucket-making factory buys this stuff for 35 rupees a kilo. Mr Khan,
   the head of a local chamber of commerce, expects to earn around
   100,000 rupees a month. He reckons it takes 150 scavenged plastic cups
   to make 100 cups of recycled plastic. Not every cup, alas, can be
   saved.


   Fukuda braces for his biggest battle, over the annual budget

   [3]Japan's politics

   THE Diet, Japan's parliament, this week saw the end of one session, an
   extraordinary one in every sense, and the start of another that will
   be ordinary only in name. With the lower house held by his Liberal
   Democratic Party (LDP) and its allies, and the upper house in the
   hands of the opposition, Yasuo Fukuda, the prime minister, has an
   excruciating task in securing the passage of the annual budget.

   The extraordinary session was a consequence of the Democratic Party of
   Japan's victory in the upper-house elections last July. The DPJ's
   blunt leader, Ichiro Ozawa, vowed to oppose any extension of the
   navy's mission in the Indian Ocean, where it refuels allies' ships as
   part of NATO's war in Afghanistan. The government sees the mission as
   proof of Japan's global commitment; Mr Ozawa says it breaches the
   country's pacifist constitution.

   Mr Ozawa warned Mr Fukuda, who took over as a "caretaker" prime
   minister in September, that the unprecedented use of the LDP's
   supermajority in the lower house to override upper-house opposition to
   the refuelling mission would provoke a formal censure from the upper
   house. And that would surely bring a general election.

   Yet on January 11th, when the LDP used its supermajority to reinstate
   the mission, no censure followed. As for toppling the government, late
   last year Mr Ozawa held secret talks with Mr Fukuda on forming a
   "grand coalition", an action disowned by his party. If there is any
   logic to Mr Ozawa's climbdown, it is that the public is indifferent to
   the refuelling debate. Wages are stagnant and the future of social
   welfare uncertain: pocketbook matters count. A member of the shadow
   cabinet says the DPJ is holding its fire for the budget fight. With
   the economy and stockmarket stumbling, that offers the best chance of
   bringing down the government.

   A drama is certain. The annual budget needs simply to pass the lower
   house. But all sorts of supplementary bills need upper-house approval.
   If they do not get it, the ruling coalition could--at some political
   cost--use its supermajority again. However, procedural rules mean
   there is not enough time for that before the new fiscal year begins on
   April 1st. So government programmes might come to a halt, while tax
   uncertainties would harm investment.

   A big battle will be over the renewal of a petrol-tax surcharge, whose
   proceeds are earmarked for roads and such. If the opposition wills it,
   petrol will fall by 24 ($0.22) a litre on April 1st, and Mr Fukuda
   may be loth to anger consumers by forcing a price rise a few weeks
   later. But who cares about consumers? Most prefectural governments,
   including DPJ ones, want the surcharge, to lavish as pork on local
   building firms. Besides, stalling the budget for political ends could
   backfire on the opposition. And Mr Fukuda may not use his
   supermajority powers. Budget matters are not black-or-white, and Mr
   Fukuda is grey by nature. Compromises are possible.

   It is a conundrum for the opposition. Unusually, the opinion polls
   suggest the DPJ is more popular than the ruling coalition and, for all
   its internal divisions, it has little to lose from a general election.
   Yet the election is Mr Fukuda's to call, and he says he will not even
   think of one until he has hosted the G8 summit, in July.

   Most politicians now expect an election not in April but late in the
   summer. That assumes that Mr Fukuda will weather not just the budget
   fight, but also an almighty mess of lost records at the pensions
   agency and a defence-procurement scandal that looks about to claim a
   former defence minister, Fumio Kyuma.

   By the summer, though, Mr Fukuda, the "caretaker", may want to hang on
   longer. He is not bound to call an election until September 2009.
   Stability, of sorts, then. The price? Continued political chaos and
   none of the bold measures badly needed to set the economy on a firmer
   footing. In the meantime, as Tadamori Oshima, the LDP's Diet-affairs
   chairman, moans, "The world believes Japan's politicians are unable to
   decide on anything, not even to put one foot in front of the other."


   The party throws a sop to the workers


   LABOUR conditions in China can be notoriously lousy. Reports abound of
   sweatshops, workers' protests and this year even of officials
   condoning the luring of children into slavery. A new law on employment
   contracts, coming into effect on January 1st, will in theory improve
   workers' lots, but is creating more headaches.

   The law is supposed to provide greater job security. Workers with ten
   years or more of service will have open-ended contracts and companies
   will have to inform unions before sacking anyone. Employers fear the
   law will mean bigger severance payments. The unions will also have the
   power to negotiate collective contracts.

   But the law has many detractors. Some allege it will take China back
   to the "iron rice bowl" era of Maoist days when jobs were for life and
   the economy was crippled by a lack of incentive. Others, conversely,
   argue that it will strengthen state-controlled unions but do little
   for downtrodden workers.

   Both sides agree it has loopholes, which companies have been racing to
   exploit. The Chinese press has cited numerous attempts by enterprises
   to circumvent the law. Huawei, China's best-known maker of
   telecommunications equipment, has attracted special notice. It has
   been accused of asking some 7,000 employees with more than eight years
   of service to resign to compete for new short-term posts. The aim,
   allegedly, was to reclassify them as new employees.

   The new law has been a boon to the All-China Federation of Trade
   Unions (ACFTU), an umbrella for all China's unions that is in effect
   an arm of government. In recent years it has seen its power eroded as
   state-owned industries have collapsed and the private sector has
   flourished, eschewing niceties such as unions and Communist Party
   cells.

   After persuading Huawei, which denied trying to evade the law, to
   revise its plans, the ACFTU this week issued a stern warning to other
   companies not to try anything similar. It said a "small number" were
   laying off large numbers of workers in advance of the new law. This,
   it said, was threatening the success of efforts to build a "socialist
   harmonious society" and should be "resolutely stopped".

   But for all the ACFTU's propaganda, few expect it to emerge as a
   strident new champion of workers' rights. Independent trade unions
   will remain in effect illegal. China has no plans to reintroduce the
   right to strike, which it abolished in 1982 as it began to fret about
   the example set by the Solidarity trade-union movement in Poland. The
   role of the ACFTU, in the government's eyes, is to prevent worker
   unrest.

   One of the main aims of the new law is to counter the widespread
   complaints in China that the country has been over-zealous in its
   embrace of capitalism. These complaints became particularly shrill in
   June, after reports emerged that local officials in the northern
   province of Shanxi had allowed rural brick kilns to lure hundreds of
   people, including children, to work in slave-like conditions. The new
   law had been publicly debated long before the scandal surfaced. But
   its critics say the government rushed to push it through the
   rubber-stamp legislature in June in order to assuage public anger over
   the kilns.

   One of the law's most outspoken critics is Dong Baohua of the East
   China University of Political Science and Law, who helped draft
   China's first labour law in 1994. Among Mr Dong's complaints is that
   the new law does nothing to improve the lot of tens of millions of
   migrant workers from the countryside. They make up most of the
   unskilled labour in urban areas and are the most frequent victims of
   poor labour conditions. China's official trade unions have yet to
   build a network among such workers. Nor will the law help people such
   as Shanxi's slaves, who suffer not from a lack of legal protection but
   from poor enforcement. Mr Dong also says the new law will not cut the
   number of labour disputes, which have become increasingly common in
   recent years (see chart).

   For all the ACFTU's fulminations, critics say many companies will
   continue efforts to evade the law or else simply ignore it. But in an
   interview published by one of China's biggest-circulation newspapers,
   Southern Weekend, Mr Dong argued that China could also end up like
   France, with its economy numbed by costly employment benefits and
   strikes triggered by any effort to reform them. That, he said, would
   be the "most terrifying" outcome for China. The party would agree.


                                                                  Eyevine

                                  Eyevine

   All the misery of Maoism with none of the redeeming features


   THE place often seems like a black box from which the occasional
   horror (like a nuclear bomb) emerges without warning or welcome. North
   Korea certainly deserves its nickname, the hermit kingdom. Visitors
   are tightly controlled and only a trickle of Westerners admitted. Yet
   even North Korea needs dollars, and tries to get them by attracting
   Chinese tourists, who go for the gambling, and the bizarre allure of a
   bygone era of fanaticism and privation that China itself once endured.
   Joining a group of 60 visitors, this is what you find.

   The North Koreans can put on a good show. In April and May, no fewer
   than 100,000 performers went through a series of synchronised
   gymnastic displays at the May 1st Stadium in Pyongyang, the capital.
   Even a few hundred Western tourists got a peek (many from the
   arch-enemy, America, whose tourists are normally kept at bay). To
   Chinese visitors, the show, known as Arirang, was reminiscent of
   similar extravaganzas in Beijing during the days of Mao Zedong.
   "Nowadays I doubt whether we could do it," says one, wistfully. Next
   year's Olympic Games in Beijing, he suggests, might prove an
   exception.

   In the late 1990s, the North Koreans allowed investors from Hong Kong
   and Macau to set up casinos in their closed world. One was in
   Rajin-Sonbong, a failed investment zone close to the Chinese border;
   another lurked in the basement of an isolated hotel for foreigners in
   Pyongyang. North Korea correctly reckoned that, since gambling is
   banned in China, these would be a big attraction (gambling is also
   banned in North Korea for ordinary citizens, but the government
   allowed Chinese to staff the casinos).

   As China saw it, the casinos proved rather too popular, drawing huge
   numbers of corrupt officials. Two years ago, China cracked down on
   cross-border gambling--appealing to neighbouring countries to close
   down casinos, banning travel agents from offering gambling tours,
   restricting foreign visits by officials--after one official allegedly
   embezzled hundreds of thousands of dollars of government funds and
   gambled the money away at the casino in Rajin-Sonbong. This has now
   been closed. The one in Pyongyang is still open, but is beyond the
   range of weekend holiday-makers. These days you find few gamblers
   there, mostly Chinese tourists betting a few tens of dollars to help
   relieve the tedium of endless mind-numbing tours of political
   monuments.

   Neither China nor North Korea publishes regular figures for tourism in
   each other's country but the crackdown seems to have taken its toll.
   One Chinese newspaper said there had been 20,000 job losses in
   Dandong, a border town through which Chinese tourists usually pass on
   their way to North Korea by train. The number of Chinese visitors to
   Dandong has fallen to a quarter of what it was in the peak years. Last
   August many travel agencies said North Korea had stopped accepting
   Chinese visitors. It is not clear why. Some cited floods. One official
   newspaper said it was because North Korea had reduced its annual quota
   for Chinese tourists. It is likely that it was also piqued by China's
   unusually tart response to its supposed ally's missile and nuclear
   tests. Early this year, restrictions appeared to ease again.

   What remains is a niche market for the curious and sated. For all
   their professed ideological similarities, North Korea and China are
   worlds apart. Affluent urban Chinese who have travelled to other parts
   of Asia now visit North Korea for its rarity value, and for a taste of
   what they themselves have escaped from. One member of your
   correspondent's group was the son of a Korean war veteran. He and
   other Chinese visitors were disappointed to find little public
   acknowledgement of China's role in the Korean war of 1950-53, when
   hundreds of thousands of Chinese died fighting the Americans.

   Older Chinese visitors find striking comparisons with their own
   country, 30 or more years ago. The public worship of North Korea's
   leader, Kim Jong Il, and of his late father, Kim Il Sung, is similar
   to the cult of Mao. The state ideology of juche (self-reliance) has
   much in common with Mao's isolationism. Chinese tourists are given
   warning, before leaving, to avoid commenting on North Korean politics
   and to be careful where they point their cameras. China was once as
   prickly.

   North Korea is almost as wary of Chinese visitors as it is of
   Westerners. Like Westerners, Chinese are assigned guides whose job is
   to prevent spontaneous contact with locals. Some guides express
   disdain for Chinese socialism. "China is so dirty now and so
   expensive, and takes no stance whatsoever against the American
   imperialists", says one (with its industry barely operating, North
   Korea's air does seem refreshingly unpolluted to Chinese visitors).

   The kind of tourism North Korea prefers is the carefully controlled
   tours by South Koreans to Mount Kumgang, a scenic resort on the
   northern side of their common border. There, they have virtually no
   contact with locals (South Korean tourists are rarely welcome in
   Pyongyang). On May 17th, North and South Korea opened the first rail
   links across the border since the Korean war. It was largely a
   symbolic act. Maybe one day such links will make it easier to travel
   to Mount Kumgang and to Kaesong, a South Korean investment zone in the
   north. But there is no sign North Korea plans to let South Koreans
   travel freely. Regular train services are still a distant prospect.

   As mobile-phone-loving Chinese tourists frequently complain, North
   Korea does not allow visitors to bring their phones into the
   country--so fearful is it of unmonitored information conduits to the
   outside world. There is no internet access even in expensive hotels.
   North Koreans authorised to speak to visitors appear to be oblivious
   of their guests' annoyance at such privations. They boast that North
   Korea's economy once outperformed China's, particularly in the 1960s
   when China was gripped by famine. One Chinese visitor says her brother
   fled to North Korea then. The North Koreans do not allow her to try to
   contact him.

   A Chinese travel agent says North Korea's poverty is part of its
   off-beat appeal. If North Korea were to become richer, she says, it
   would lose its competitive tourism advantage. Not that it is a huge
   draw, even when it does welcome tourists. The Arirang performance,
   originally due to last for a month, ended several days early because
   of insufficient paying visitors.


   Mixed blessings for China


   POLITICAL developments in Taiwan rarely bring cheer for China. But the
   ruling party's surprising choice for its candidate to fight next
   year's presidential elections will at least provide a little comfort
   to the government in Beijing. It would be happier still if he were to
   lose.

   Frank Hsieh, a former prime minister who wants better relations with
   China, won the nomination after a decisive victory in a ballot on May
   6th among members of the ruling Democratic Progressive Party (DPP). He
   got 45% of the vote, compared with 33% for his main rival, the
   incumbent prime minister, Su Tseng-chang. This was a blow to President
   Chen Shui-bian, who favoured Mr Su and a tougher stance towards China.

   Just as remarkably, given bitter in-fighting within the DPP, Mr Su and
   the two other candidates withdrew gracefully from the race. According
   to party rules, they could have fought a further round. Mr Hsieh's
   nomination will be formally confirmed at the DPP's annual congress on
   June 30th.

   Mr Hsieh has a reputation as a scrapper, having survived numerous
   crises and failures. These include a defeat as a vice-presidential
   candidate in 1996 and controversy about alleged connections with a
   cult led by a man claiming to have supernatural powers who has been
   convicted of fraud. Only five months ago, Mr Hsieh lost a race for the
   mayorship of Taipei. He hopes his political fortunes will mimic those
   of President Chen, who won the presidency in 2000 after losing a bid
   for re-election as mayor of Taipei in 1998. In the presidential
   election next March, Mr Hsieh's chief opponent will be the man who
   defeated Mr Chen in 1998, Ma Ying-jeou, the charismatic nominee of the
   main opposition party, the Kuomintang (KMT).

   Mr Hsieh owes his victory partly to the frustration of DPP members
   with Mr Chen's lacklustre performance. But he faces a tough battle
   against Mr Ma. A poll released this week by the China Times, a pro-KMT
   newspaper, put Mr Ma nine points ahead of Mr Hsieh, although he led by
   20 points before the primary.

   Criminal investigations might yet play a role in the contest. Mr Ma is
   on trial for allegedly embezzling a mayoral special allowance and has
   vowed to remain in the race even if found guilty. There is speculation
   that Mr Hsieh, too, might be indicted on corruption charges in a case
   dating back to his tenure as mayor of the island's second-largest
   city, Kaohsiung, from 1998 to 2005. Should he be charged, the DPP
   would probably put pressure on him to withdraw.

   Like President Chen, Mr Hsieh is a former lawyer who in the past
   defended dissidents under the authoritarian rule of the KMT. Unlike Mr
   Chen, who takes an uncompromising stance towards China, Mr Hsieh has
   called for "coexistence and reconciliation", though he has also called
   for constitutional revisions aimed at making Taiwan a "normal
   country"--a goal that has caused considerable anxiety in both Beijing
   and Washington, DC.

   China would prefer a victory for Mr Ma, who has pushed for better ties
   with China, particularly economic ones. He has not ruled out
   unification, though he says China must become a democracy first. The
   coming months are likely to be turbulent ones in Taiwanese politics,
   something China never likes.


   The Tigers and the government match outrage with outrage

                                                                  Reuters
                                                                  Reuters

                                           Prabhakaran's fearful symmetry


   THE annual speech by Velupillai Prabhakaran, chieftain of the
   Liberation Tigers of Tamil Eelam, to mark "Heroes' Day" on November
   27th is anxiously awaited by Sri Lankans. The elusive separatist
   leader often uses it to reveal his macabre or heroic plans for the
   coming months. This year, however, there were no prizes for guessing
   his intentions. Both the Tigers, fighting for a Tamil homeland
   ("eelam"), and the hawkish government in Colombo had already made
   their positions plain: the 24-year-old war, which has claimed more
   than 70,000 civilian lives, will be stepped up.

   A few hours before Mr Prabhakaran's speech, the air force bombed the
   Tigers' radio station, killing nine civilian staff. So it was
   circulated by telephone and the internet. Combative as ever, Mr
   Prabhakaran declared that it would be "naive" to expect any peaceful
   solution from the Sinhalese-dominated government, and exhorted Tamils
   to fight on.

   It did not take him long to translate words into action. The next day
   he sent a disabled Tamil woman with a bomb strapped to her chest in a
   failed attempt to assassinate an ethnic-Tamil government minister seen
   as a "traitor" to the cause. The same day a bomb killed 20 people in a
   shopping mall in Colombo. The violence seemed a rebuff to foreign
   governments, which had been asking the Tigers to stop political
   assassinations and terrorist attacks, to win world support for a
   decent deal for the Tamils.

   As in the past, the Sri Lankan government soon squandered some of the
   sympathy it was due. It randomly arrested 2,554 Tamils in and around
   Colombo and put 400 of them in Boosa, a detention camp for terrorist
   suspects. Human-rights groups were outraged. On December 4th a
   petition was filed in the Supreme Court. Recalling the court's angry
   response in June when it had summarily ejected 376 Tamils from
   Colombo, the government hurried to free 2,352 people that very day.

   rights reserved.

   IFRAME:
   [4]http://switch.atdmt.com/iaction/oy6ats_EconomistcomLandingPage_1

   [activity;src=1245986;type=econo981;cat=e09as761;ord=1?]

   IFRAME:
   [5]http://ad.n2434.doubleclick.net/activity;src=1113415;type=2ndli341;
   cat=world756;ord=1;num=1?

References

   1. http://ad.doubleclick.net/jump/main.economist.com/printer;pos=1;sect=world;sect=p_top;sect=d_top;sect=world_p_top;sect=world_d_top;sz=468x60;tile=1;dcopt=ist;ord=92705546?
   2. http://www.economist.com/index.cfm
   3. http://www.economist.com/background/displayBackground.cfm?story_id=9178992
   4. http://switch.atdmt.com/iaction/oy6ats_EconomistcomLandingPage_1
   5. http://ad.n2434.doubleclick.net/activity;src=1113415;type=2ndli341;cat=world756;ord=1;num=1?

   The Beijing Olympics raise tricky questions of religious freedom in
   China

   "CHINA is a country with religious freedom and respects every
   religion," boasts the [3]website of Beijing's Olympic games
   organisers. Expecting an influx of God-fearing athletes at next year's
   event, they will even cater to their spiritual needs. But China's
   wariness of foreign clergy is hard to overcome.

   In line with the International Olympic Committee's requirements,
   officials are setting up a religious centre in the Olympic village.
   Athletes will be able to attend services of their own faiths and seek
   counselling from chaplains. But, breaking with usual practice, China
   has not invited foreigners to serve as chaplains. The staff at the
   centre will belong to China's state-approved churches.

   Catholic priests from overseas were bound to be a problem. There have
   been some signs of a thaw in relations with the Vatican. This week
   Chinese clergy in the southern city of Guangzhou ordained the fourth
   bishop loyal to the Vatican to be appointed in China since September.
   But China has no diplomatic ties with the Vatican and several Catholic
   priests are in prison for refusing to co-operate with the
   state-controlled church.

   It also sometimes jails and harasses those Chinese Protestants who
   prefer to worship informally in unregistered "house churches". Foreign
   Protestants initially received positive signals. The state-supervised
   church invited them to help train Chinese clergy. But in March
   Beijing's Olympic organising committee told them that the foreigners
   themselves would not be invited to perform religious duties. No reason
   was given. Teams may still bring their own chaplains with them. But at
   past events many countries have not included chaplains in their own
   delegations, assuming that the host country would invite foreign
   clergy.

   China is uneasy about religious activities at the games. The Olympics
   normally draw many foreign Christian missionaries who, unlike the
   official chaplains, try to spread their faith. Proselytising is banned
   in China. Beijing's Olympic organisers avoid public comment on the
   foreign-chaplain issue, saying only that the religious needs of
   athletes will be met. In 2000 China's state-run news agency, Xinhua,
   reported that a Chinese Buddhist had been invited to serve as a
   chaplain at the Olympics in Sydney. So such needs should be familiar
   to Beijing's games organisers.


   Ethnic violence threatens Nepal's new-found peace


   THE peace process in Nepal passed important landmarks this month as
   former Maoist rebels joined an interim parliament and started putting
   their guns into storage. Yet even as a final settlement to that
   insurgency remains distant, the country is faced with another cause of
   violence: ethnic strife in its southern plains next to India, a region
   known as the Terai.

   The two conflicts are connected. Ten years of Maoist insurgency have
   made many Nepalis more assertive and convinced some of the merits of
   political violence. Also, the peace process will involve a
   constitutional assembly, for which elections are due in June. The
   ethnic group known as Madhesis, who dominate the Terai, fear they will
   be cheated.

   Nepal's censuses have always underestimated Madhesi numbers.
   Ethnically and culturally, they are indistinguishable from the Indians
   across the border. They probably make up more than 40% of the
   population but are barely represented in the bureaucracy, army or
   police and their "Nepaliness" is constantly questioned. Ahead of the
   elections there is a drive to give millions of Madhesis the
   citizenship they lack, allowing them to vote. But Madhesi politicians
   complain that constituencies are gerrymandered so that "one hill vote
   is equal to 20 Terai votes".

   The Terai is volatile. A breakaway faction of ex-Maoists, the Terai
   People's Liberation Front, is waging a violent campaign for
   independence. In December a campaign for Madhesi rights in the town of
   Nepalganj turned into communal violence as hill-people sacked and
   burnt Madhesi businesses in a two-day spree, condoned by the local
   authorities. This week there were demonstrations, daylong curfews and
   five deaths in the central Terai after a Maoist shot dead a Madhesi
   protester.

   Fanning the flames is the monarchy, all-powerful a year ago in what
   was the world's only Hindu kingdom, but now at risk of abolition. By
   sowing communal tension, the palace may hope to postpone the election.
   Consistent accounts place royal agents in the Terai stirring things
   up, as well as in India, appealing to religious fanatics by linking
   the future of Hinduism, Madhesis and the royal family. Hridesh
   Tripathi, a cabinet minister who leads a Terai-based party, says it is
   to be expected that the palace "will use all forms of conspiracy". The
   Madhesis' grievances give the plotters some fertile ground.


   Japanese employees are working themselves to death

   HARA-KIRI is a uniquely Japanese form of suicide. Its corporate
   equivalent is karoshi, "death by overwork". Since this was legally
   recognised as a cause of death in the 1980s, the number of cases
   submitted to the government for the designation has soared; so has the
   number of court cases that result when the government refuses an
   application. In 1988 only about 4% of applications were successful. By
   2005 that share had risen to 40%. If a death is judged karoshi,
   surviving family members may receive compensation of around $20,000 a
   year from the government and sometimes up to $1m from the company in
   damages. For deaths not designated karoshi the family gets next to
   nothing.

   Now a recent court ruling has put companies under pressure to change
   their ways. On November 30th the Nagoya District Court accepted Hiroko
   Uchino's claim that her husband, Kenichi, a third-generation Toyota
   employee, was a victim of karoshi when he died in 2002 at the age of
   30. He collapsed at 4am at work, having put in more than 80 hours of
   overtime each month for six months before his death. "The moment when
   I am happiest is when I can sleep," Mr Uchino told his wife the week
   of his death. He left two children, aged one and three.

   As a manager of quality control, Mr Uchino was constantly training
   workers, attending meetings and writing reports when not on the
   production line. Toyota treated almost all that time as voluntary and
   unpaid. So did the Toyota Labour Standards Inspection Office, part of
   the labour ministry. But the court ruled that the long hours were an
   integral part of his job. On December 14th the government decided not
   to appeal against the verdict.

   The ruling is important because it may increase the pressure on
   companies to treat "free overtime" (work that an employee is obliged
   to perform but not paid for) as paid work. That would send shockwaves
   through corporate Japan, where long, long hours are the norm.

   Official figures say that the Japanese work about 1,780 hours a year,
   slightly less than Americans (1,800 hours a year), though more than
   Germans (1,440). But the statistics are misleading because they do not
   count "free overtime". Other tallies show that one in three men aged
   30 to 40 works over 60 hours a week. Half say they get no overtime.
   Factory workers arrive early and stay late, without pay. Training at
   weekends may be uncompensated.

   During the past 20 years of economic doldrums, many companies have
   replaced full-time workers with part-time ones. Regular staff who
   remain benefit from lifetime employment but feel obliged to work extra
   hours lest their positions be made temporary. Cultural factors
   reinforce these trends. Hard work is respected as the cornerstone of
   Japan's post-war economic miracle. The value of self-sacrifice puts
   the benefit of the group above that of the individual.

   Toyota, which is challenging GM as the world's largest carmaker, is
   often praised for the efficiency and flexibility of its workforce. Ms
   Uchino has a different view. "It is because so many people work free
   overtime that Toyota reaps profits," she says. "I hope some of those
   profits can be brought back to help the employees and their families.
   That would make Toyota a true global leader." The company is promising
   to prevent karoshi in future.


   Down to earth, even at 29,000 feet

   FEW men who find themselves cast as heroes early in life continue to
   command universal esteem till the end. Sir Edmund Hillary was one. To
   be the first to reach the top of the world's highest mountain ensured
   international celebrity and a place in history, but the modesty of a
   slightly gauche New Zealand beekeeper never departed him. Nor was
   mountaineering, or indeed apiculture, his only accomplishment.

                                                                  Reuters

                                  Reuters

                             Sherpa and friend

   Two views are often expressed about his life. One is that conquering
   Everest was everything. No one would play down the role of Tenzing
   Norgay, the Sherpa who reached the peak with him, possibly even before
   him; their partnership was like that of Ginger Rogers and Fred
   Astaire. But it was Sir Edmund who first wriggled his way up a crack
   in the 12-metre (40-foot) rockface that had to be overcome after the
   south summit if the real one was to be achieved, and below which only
   oblivion awaited.

   News of the British-led expedition's triumph on May 29th 1953 reached
   the world through a report in the London Times four days later. The
   Times, a sponsor of the expedition, had used an elaborate code to
   outwit any rivals monitoring the radio waves. Its scoop was indeed a
   coup: June 2nd was the day of Queen Elizabeth's coronation.

   Sir Edmund was a man of action. After Everest came more expeditions in
   Nepal, a race to the South Pole and further adventures in the
   Antarctic, the Himalayas and India. But for some onlookers neither
   these nor even the Everest expedition was especially remarkable:
   fitness and physical courage are all very well, they argued, but the
   world's highest peak was simply waiting to be scaled, and a steady
   traffic nowadays makes its way to the top unnoticed, except for the
   litter it leaves.

   Both the dismissive and the awe-struck, however, agree that Sir
   Edmund's other life was wholly admirable, and he himself said he was
   prouder of it than of anything else. This was his tireless work for
   the Sherpas, of whom he had become so fond. Through his efforts, and
   those of Tenzing, hospitals, clinics, bridges, airstrips and nearly 30
   schools have been built in the Solo Khumbu region of Nepal just south
   of Everest. If New Zealand claimed Sir Edmund's loyalty, Nepal, and
   especially its Sherpas, could surely claim his heart.


   Yet another cold-war revival 


   WITHOUT fanfare, China has created a colossal new city. It is called a
   city even though it barely has a population to speak of and consists
   mostly of water and desolate islands. It would be no more than a
   bizarre misnomer were it not that the affected area--a swathe of the
   South China Sea--has other claimants, too.

   In recent years, China has become less strident in asserting its
   claims to sovereignty over islands in the South China Sea. In an
   effort to strengthen ties with wary South-East Asian neighbours, it
   has preferred to play down territorial disputes and stress the need
   for joint efforts to exploit the oilfields beneath the waves.

   But wariness persists. Vietnam has been riled by what it says was a
   recent Chinese decision to upgrade the status of the organisation that
   China says is responsible for the archipelagoes of the Paracels and
   Spratlys as well as the submerged reefs of Macclesfield Bank (see
   map). The outfit in charge of these territories is located on Woody
   Island in the Paracels. Its jurisdiction is reportedly being
   relabelled as the "county-level city" of Sansha (an abbreviation of
   Xisha, Nansha and Zhongsha, China's names for the outcrops), part of
   Hainan province.

   In deference to its neighbours' sensitivities, China has not publicly
   confirmed the action. But Vietnam made its point by tolerating rare
   demonstrations on December 9th outside China's embassy in Hanoi and
   its consulate in Ho Chi Minh City. The Chinese, having used similar
   tactics themselves during spats with other countries--notably
   Japan--would have got the message clearly enough.

   Vietnam had already been piqued by China's staging of big military
   exercises in the South China Sea in November, close to the Paracels.
   China has controlled the islands since it drove out a South Vietnamese
   garrison in 1974. In the 1990s it extended the runway on Woody Island.
   In August China's state-run media said plans had been approved to
   develop group tourism on the archipelago. An official was quoted as
   saying this would be an important way of demonstrating sovereignty.

   But neither China nor Vietnam wants to see their differences
   deteriorate, let alone to the level of 1979 when the countries fought
   a brief border war (occasional skirmishes continued into the 1980s,
   including one in the Spratlys in 1988). During a meeting in November
   in Singapore, China's prime minister, Wen Jiabao, told his Vietnamese
   counterpart that efforts to demarcate their land border should be
   speeded up. The new Sansha city embraces the Spratlys, where the
   Philippines, Brunei, Malaysia and Taiwan also have claims. But these
   contenders have so far kept quiet.

   Tensions between the claimants have eased since China signed an
   agreement with South-East Asian countries in 2002 to resolve their
   disputes in the South China Sea peacefully. In the past couple of
   years China, Vietnam and the Philippines have been conducting an
   unprecedented joint survey of the South China Sea to probe its oil and
   gas reserves. This, however, is the easy part. When they eventually
   determine how big the reserves are, they will have to decide how to
   share them.


   America blunders into Taiwan's electoral politics


   SELDOM do Taiwan's two big political parties find anything to agree
   on. But they are at present united in condemning recent American
   pronouncements on Taiwan. So when George Bush met his Chinese
   counterpart, Hu Jintao, in Sydney on September 6th, the Taiwanese were
   especially concerned at what he might say.

   At issue is a referendum planned to coincide with presidential
   elections in Taiwan in March next year. It would seek support for a
   doomed attempt to join the United Nations as "Taiwan", rather than
   "the Republic of China", under which name it lost its seat to China in
   1971. China--and, it seems, America--regard the referendum as the thin
   end of a wedge. The fat end would be a Taiwanese declaration of
   independence from China.

   At worst, Mr Bush might have repeated a recent statement from a member
   of his National Security Council, Dennis Wilder, that Taiwan could not
   join the UN because "it is not at this point a state in the
   international community". In fact, the issue seems simply to have been
   ignored. But that, too, was depressing for Taiwan, given the
   importance of the referendum. America is a vital ally. But the latest
   debate has brought relations to a low ebb.

   Eager to build his legacy before he steps down in May next year,
   Taiwan's president, Chen Shui-bian, has aggressively, if unavailingly,
   pursued membership for Taiwan in international organisations. He has
   defended this policy as necessary to break out of diplomatic
   isolation. For 14 years Taiwan has vainly been applying for UN
   membership under the name "Republic of China". Mr Chen launched the
   new bid in July and has backed it with a public-relations campaign
   that will culminate in a mass rally on September 15th, three days
   before the annual session of the UN General Assembly.

   The referendum is in part designed to win votes for Mr Chen's
   Democratic Progressive Party (DPP) in presidential and legislative
   elections. The DPP's roots are in the Taiwan independence movement,
   though in office it has toned down its rhetoric. The main opposition
   Nationalist party, the Kuomintang or KMT, favours eventual unification
   with China, which is not popular with voters. To limit any political
   damage from the DPP's referendum, the KMT has proposed one of its own,
   to ask whether Taiwan should use "pragmatic and flexible strategies"
   to rejoin international bodies such as the UN.

   China has never renounced what it says is its right to "reunify"
   Taiwan by force, and in 2005 enshrined this in an "Anti-Secession
   Law". In the past, when angered by Taiwan's manoeuvring, China has
   rattled its sabre, with the unintended consequence of boosting support
   for the DPP. This year, however, China has largely remained calm, but
   for some pointed references to the Anti-Secession Law.

   In fact it was America's opposition to the referendum that brought the
   debate to life in Taiwan. Tired of the political bickering, and
   doubtful about Mr Chen's leadership, the Taiwanese public showed
   little interest until last month. Then John Negroponte, a deputy
   secretary of state, said the referendum was a mistake and that America
   considered it a step towards a declaration of independence.

   Just as China has learned in the past, however, such criticism of
   moves towards de jure independence can backfire. America's reaction
   has convinced the DPP, already sceptical of the depth of American
   support for Taiwan, that it has nothing to lose by pursuing a campaign
   that is bound to harm ties. Even so, the referendum may not give it
   the backing it wants. Under Taiwan's referendum law, the proposal
   needs more than half the 16.8m eligible voters to cast their ballots
   and more than half of those who vote to support it. Even with the
   bonus of American opposition, that may be too high a bar.


   By electing allies of the deposed prime minister, Thaksin Shinawatra,
   Thais have voted against the 2006 coup. But the country's worries are
   not over yet 

                                                                      EPA

                                    EPA


   IN STARK contrast to the terrible political violence in Pakistan and
   Kenya, Thailand's election, on December 23rd, was mostly peaceful. It
   also, notwithstanding perennial complaints of vote-buying, seemed
   largely fair. More remarkably, the military chiefs who deposed the
   government of Thaksin Shinawatra in a coup in 2006 seemed to accept
   the public's decision to overrule the coup and restore Mr Thaksin's
   allies to power in the form of the People's Power Party (PPP), a
   reincarnation of his disbanded Thai Rak Thai (TRT).

   Mr Thaksin, too, has struck a conciliatory note. This week he said he
   would return from exile soon and invite the coupmakers to a round of
   golf. "For the sake of the country's reconciliation", he would meet
   his nemesis, General Prem Tinsulanonda, the chief adviser to King
   Bhumibol, and the man widely presumed to be the mastermind behind the
   coup.

   If so, Thailand may emerge from two years of political strife and
   regain its former status as a beacon of multi-party democracy in Asia.
   Until recently such an outcome had seemed improbable. In October a
   memo came to light detailing the junta's plans, through spreading
   black propaganda and fomenting anti-Thaksin protests, to subvert the
   election to thwart a PPP victory. However, embarrassed by the plan's
   discovery, and perhaps disheartened by months of unpopularity, the
   junta seems to have dropped the plan and let the people decide.

   A potential spanner in the works is a decision by the Election
   Commission, due later this month, on which winning candidates will be
   disqualified for electoral malpractice. Early in the campaign the
   commission announced absurdly stringent regulations, raising fears it
   might apply them partially, to disqualify PPP candidates, or indeed
   the entire party, on flimsy grounds. The commission later absolved the
   junta over its plot to subvert the election, arguing that the
   conspiracy had not been enacted and thus no harm was done. If it is
   consistent it will judge poll-fraud allegations by the same yardstick,
   disqualifying elected members only if their rule-breaking may have
   altered the results. Early this week there were signs of splits in the
   commission, with one of its members saying he wanted to quit.

   It had been widely assumed that the PPP would get the most seats but
   not enough to prevent its main rival, the Democrat party, from forming
   a governing coalition. However, the Thaksinites did better than
   expected, winning 233 seats, only eight short of a majority in the
   480-seat lower house (see chart). This was in spite of a recent change
   to the electoral system--to merge single-seat constituencies into ones
   returning up to three members--that seemed designed to encourage Mr
   Thaksin's supporters to spread their votes around other parties. As
   the extent of the PPP's victory became clear on election night, Samak
   Sundaravej, Mr Thaksin's stand-in as party leader, insisted he would
   be prime minister. By the middle of this week it seemed as if the PPP
   had persuaded most or all of the five minor parties that won seats to
   join its coalition. This would give it a big enough majority to
   withstand all but an extravagant number of disqualifications.

   Mr Thaksin took full advantage of his crushing majority in the last
   parliament, pushing his cronies into key institutional jobs while
   scorning his critics. His allies' new government may not have it so
   easy. For one thing, the Democrats emerged stronger from the election,
   gaining 165 seats, up from 96 in the 2005 election (when the lower
   house had 500 seats), so they should provide more effective
   opposition. Furthermore, a new constitution narrowly approved in a
   referendum in August strengthens the checks and balances against an
   over-mighty executive. This includes a dubious change in which some
   Senate members will be appointed by judges and officials (the rest
   will be elected, probably in March).

   Ideally the PPP-led government would offer the advantages of the
   previous TRT ones--sound macroeconomic management and policies to aid
   poor rural villagers--without the disadvantages, such as Mr Thaksin's
   autocratic tendencies and conflicts of interest. To boost flagging
   economic growth and weak investment, confidence in the stability and
   competence of government needs to be restored swiftly.

   Samak the knife

   However, Thailand's political strife may not yet be over. Mr Samak,
   abrasive and uncouth, may prove an even more divisive prime minister
   than Mr Thaksin. Mr Samak is a staunch royalist but he is also a foe
   of General Prem, so it cannot be guaranteed that the generals and the
   Thaksinites will kiss and make up, especially since Mr Samak wants to
   lift Mr Thaksin's five-year ban from politics, and halt the corruption
   inquiries the coupmakers instigated against him. Mr Thaksin insists he
   has retired from politics but not everyone believes he will keep his
   word. If he or close relatives take top jobs in the new
   administration, and especially if he uses his restored power to seek
   revenge on the coupmakers, he risks renewed street protests and a
   reaction from the army's hardliners.

   In the absence of such a disaster, history may look kindly on the
   perpetrators of Thailand's 18th coup since the end of absolute
   monarchy in 1932. They spilled no blood and kept their promise to
   restore democracy promptly. But they and their supporters would have
   been more nefarious had Thai public opinion not stopped them: they
   tried to insert a clause in the new constitution granting themselves
   sweeping powers in the event of a political conflict, and then tried
   to achieve the same by means of an ordinary law, which the
   military-appointed interim assembly watered down before passing last
   month.

   The generals signally failed to prove the claims of "rampant
   corruption" and other misdeeds by Mr Thaksin used to justify the coup.
   Worse, they did nothing to correct the most heinous abuses of his
   administration: extrajudicial killings by police during a 2003 "war on
   drugs" and two massacres in 2004 of Muslim protesters by security
   forces in Thailand's troubled south. The junta and those among the
   fickle Bangkok elite who excused the coup should have learned their
   lesson that extra-constitutional excursions do not solve problems.
   That, however, may be too much to hope.


   A president-elect starts to roll

   ASKED about the power of the president in South Korea, an aide to Lee
   Myung-bak, who was elected to the post last month, said he could do
   anything except change a man into a woman or a woman into a man. Not
   yet, anyway. Mr Lee, who will assume office on February 25th, will
   concentrate yet more power in the presidential palace, Seoul's Blue
   House.

   At a news conference this week, Mr Lee promised a slimmed-down
   government. The number of ministries will be cut from 18 to 13 by
   eliminating or merging functions. Important economic and
   foreign-policy decisions will come from his office. He has also
   promised to privatise state-owned banks and other businesses. Cuts in
   corporate and personal taxation are also in the offing. "The Korean
   economy is too large and too complex to be managed by the government,"
   he says. But he seems to intend giving it his best shot.

   In December Mr Lee urged the chairmen of the country's biggest
   conglomerates to invest more in their homeland. He has asked South
   Korea's mobile-phone operators to cut their charges. And he remains
   committed to building a canal system through the country. Critics
   deride the scheme as economic lunacy and a boon for construction
   companies such as the one Mr Lee used to run, Hyundai Construction.
   Others have drawn overblown comparisons between his leadership style
   and that of Park Chung-hee, a former military dictator with a penchant
   for economic micro-management.

   That may be unfair. Mr Lee was elected because the country responded
   to his pledge of faster economic growth. As befits a former
   businessman, he is pragmatic rather than ideological. He maintains
   uneasy relations with his conservative Grand National Party. The GNP
   is there to win him seats in April's parliamentary election so he can
   pass laws.

   Conservatives howled in protest when Kim Man-bok, boss of South
   Korea's spy agency, told North Korea that Mr Lee's election victory
   would not change the South's policy of engaging it. He was forced to
   make a public apology and resign. The same day, as if to emphasise his
   hardline credentials, Mr Lee visited the American army base in central
   Seoul.


   The election will probably happen. But who will respect the result? 


   PAKISTANIS are slightly relieved. Exactly a month before polling day,
   the largest of the parties that had been refusing to contest the
   country's controversial general election, due on January 8th 2008,
   called off its boycott. This was the Pakistan Muslim League (N) headed
   by a former prime minister, Nawaz Sharif. Another former prime
   minister, Benazir Bhutto, and Maulana Fazal ur Rehman, the senior
   partner in the five-party clerical alliance, Muttahida Majlis Amal
   (MMA), had earlier decided to take part, leaving Mr Sharif with the
   choice of following suit, or risking political isolation.

   The unpopular president, Pervez Musharraf, took a huge risk in calling
   an election which seemed likely to be seen as neither free nor fair.
   Is his poll being legitimised?

   On the face of it, it might seem so. Only two national politicians are
   boycotting the event now. One is Imran Khan, a
   cricketer-turned-politician. He barely won his seat in the last
   election, and his absence will not alter the way people perceive the
   legitimacy of the vote. The other is Qazi Hussain Ahmed, the fiery
   leader of the Jamaat-e-Islami, an Islamist party that is part of the
   MMA. He is a much more formidable figure. His refusal to participate
   will break up the MMA, which had become a significant force since
   winning 11% of the vote and about a fifth of the seats in the federal
   Parliament in 2002. It also controls two provincial governments, in
   Balochistan and the North Western Frontier. Its boycott may well
   please other parties.

   But it will not end the state of uncertainty. Opposition parties have
   banded together to accuse the caretaker government, handpicked by
   President Musharraf, of pre-poll rigging. They want the chief election
   commissioner, also appointed by Mr Musharraf, replaced and the state
   of emergency imposed on November 3rd lifted. Mr Musharraf has pledged
   to do the latter on December 15th but is in no mood to concede any
   other demand.

   But if the opposition is not sanguine about the election, neither is
   Mr Musharraf himself. Having quit as army chief on November 28th, he
   cannot rely on the army and needs his loyal supporters in the Pakistan
   Muslim League (Q) to sweep the polls in order to keep Ms Bhutto and Mr
   Sharif at bay. But various opinion polls show his rivals are leading
   the pack. One, by the Washington, DC-based International Republican
   Institute, found that 70% of Pakistanis do not think his government
   deserves re-election and 67% want him to resign immediately. This
   raises the spectre of vote-rigging, violence and even boycotts on
   polling day itself.

   That is not all. The government has given warning that
   al-Qaeda-inspired terrorists could disrupt the election by bombing
   rallies. This is not just scare-mongering: a suicide bomber attacked
   Ms Bhutto's homecoming and killed more than 140 people. She has since
   restricted her movements. The fear is that terrorist attacks might
   justify a postponement of the election, especially if the ruling party
   fears a rout. Ms Bhutto claims to be the most popular politician in
   the country. If she loses, she says, it will be because of
   vote-rigging--and she would refuse to accept such a result. Mr
   Musharraf called the election to end his country's political impasse.
   But a vote perceived as unfree and unfair might increase instability,
   not reduce it.


   A by-election about the territory's future

                                                                  Reuters
                                                                  Reuters

                                            Is Anson fairest of them all?


   IT MAY be only a by-election, but it is being portrayed as a vote on
   Hong Kong's future. It is certainly the biggest celebrity contest in
   the territory's voting history. On one side is Anson Chan, a former
   head of the civil service who wants full democracy at the next
   opportunity. On the other, Regina Ip, a former security minister who
   is not so sure. Neither are many voters.

   Mrs Chan's decision in September to enter the December 2nd contest has
   upset the government in Beijing. Since her retirement in 2001, Mrs
   Chan has gradually emerged as a champion of democracy in Hong Kong. In
   a contest organised in September by pro-democratic parties to choose a
   candidate for the by-election, Mrs Chan (who has no party ties) won
   hands down. Opinion polls at first put her streets ahead of Mrs Ip,
   who is backed by parties close to the mainland government.

   In the past few weeks the two ex-bureaucrats have been trying to
   reinvent themselves as politicians. Mrs Ip, 57, spent a night in a
   cramped apartment to experience the sufferings of residents caused by
   a nearby train line. Mrs Chan, a patrician 67-year-old, has been
   visiting the poor and standing on street corners handing out leaflets.
   Facing the occasional heckler, she says, has been a "humbling
   experience".

   Mrs Chan should not have to try this hard. The by-election is in Hong
   Kong Island, a constituency where around 60% of voters normally
   support democrats. In 2003 Mrs Ip became a target of the democrats'
   wrath for her brusque attempts as Hong Kong's security chief to
   promote an anti-subversion bill that they said would restrict civil
   liberties. Hong Kong is constitutionally required to pass such
   legislation, but huge protests and the withdrawal of support by some
   pro-government legislators forced the government to shelve the idea.
   Amid the furore, Mrs Ip resigned.

   But much has changed in the past four years. In 2005, at China's quiet
   urging, the then widely disliked chief executive, Tung Chee-hwa,
   stepped down. Hong Kong's economy has revived. Mrs Ip has apologised
   for her handling of the bill (though she still defends its contents).
   She returned to Hong Kong this year after earning a master's degree at
   Stanford University. Her time abroad taught her that "it's much better
   for government if you have a mandate from the people", she says. Mrs
   Ip's election platform calls for the chief executive and the
   legislative council (LegCo) to be elected by universal suffrage in
   2012 (though she would not object to delaying this to 2016 for LegCo
   and 2017 for the chief executive). Despite widespread demands earlier
   this decade for quicker reform, many voters now appear content with
   such a timetable.

   As Mrs Ip's support among pro-Beijing groups suggests, there is a
   catch. Nominees for the post of chief executive would need the support
   of at least 10% of each of four groups within a 1,800-strong
   nominating committee. One of these groups would represent the
   industrial, commercial and financial sector. Critics say it would be
   extremely difficult to persuade even a tenth of them to support a
   candidate disliked by Beijing, given their extensive business links
   with the mainland. Mrs Chan wants to set the threshold at 10% of the
   entire nominating committee. Mrs Ip's proposal, she says, is a "huge
   step backwards".

   Democrats concede that arguments over such fine detail do not excite
   voters. They fret that in elections to district councils on November
   18th they will lose some of the gains they made in 2003 after the
   uproar over the subversion bill. Although Mrs Chan is still the
   frontrunner in the December 2nd ballot, they worry that her margin may
   be slim. And even if Mrs Ip loses, she is most likely to win in LegCo
   elections next year that allow runners-up to get seats. All good
   training, perhaps, for an eventual bid to be chief executive.


   China tells the EU to dump on Taiwan. The EU asks "How hard?"


   ASK officials in Brussels about relations between China and the
   European Union, and you will soon hear the word "values". A recent EU
   strategy paper on China calls on Europe to pursue a "dynamic
   relationship with China based on our values", notably including
   democracy and human rights.

   Try telling that to Taiwan. It is about to receive a stern EU
   injunction to act "sensibly and responsibly" by scrapping a planned
   referendum asking voters whether they would like the island to seek
   membership of the United Nations under its historic name, the
   "Republic of China", or just "Taiwan".

   Why is the EU meddling? Taiwan is a thriving democracy and big trading
   partner (almost as important as India or Brazil). The explanation is
   simple and unedifying: the EU is doing China's bidding. Chinese rulers
   regard the Taiwan referendum as a sneaky step closer to an eventual
   declaration of formal independence by the island.

   China expends extraordinary energy on pestering other governments to
   preserve the strange limbo inhabited by Taiwan, a self-governing
   island of 23m that it insists is a wayward province. Whenever Taiwan
   irks China, its ambassadors appear at foreign ministries worldwide,
   demanding that Taiwan be rebuked.

   An internal EU memorandum sheds light on the way such strong-arm
   diplomacy works. Prepared by officials working under Javier Solana,
   the EU's foreign-policy supremo, it describes a meeting, late last
   month, between the Chinese ambassador to the EU, Guan Chengyuan, and a
   top Eurocrat. According to EU note-takers, Mr Guan called the
   referendum provocative and destabilising, and said China wanted EU
   support, as it did not want to have to use "the last resort"--an
   apparent reference to its threat to use force, if necessary, to
   "reunify" Taiwan.

   The memorandum records Mr Guan's EU host as agreeing that a referendum
   is against Taiwan's own interests, and offering to send a "clear and
   forceful" message to Taipei to that effect. America, which has many
   reasons to seek China's diplomatic goodwill, has publicly rebuked
   Taiwan over the referendum. The EU, in contrast, will stick to private
   warnings for the moment, to avoid "playing into the hands" of Taiwan's
   "populist" president, Chen Shui-bian, by giving him "undesirable"
   publicity.

   Portugal, which took over the six-month rotating presidency of the EU
   this month, has duly drafted a private warning to Taiwan, saying that
   a referendum risks raising tensions and would be "unhelpful". A
   parallel message is to be sent to China, urging restraint.

   UN membership for Taiwan is a long-lost cause, and Mr Chen's
   referendum plan is at heart an electoral ploy ahead of next year's
   presidential poll. But that is the sort of thing that happens in a
   democracy. One dissenting EU diplomat says the Union is pretending
   there is "moral equivalence" between Taiwanese election politics and
   Chinese threats of violence. Certainly, this is not how most people
   understand the EU's oft-professed values.


                                                                       AP

                                     AP

   The stadiums, transport, ticketing, air pollution and even the weather
   are under control; shame about the people


   WITH exactly a year to go, the organisers of next year's Beijing
   Olympic games on August 8th set their countdown clock ticking in
   earnest--and in grand style, with a three-hour, nationally televised
   song-and-dance extravaganza in Tiananmen Square. Lest there were any
   doubt at all as to the intended message, the glitzy show featured a
   purpose-written anthem entitled "We are ready!"

   In discussing their readiness, Chinese officials seem most keen to
   talk about the impressive collection of new and renovated sports
   venues that will house the competitions, such as the National Stadium
   (above), and the equally impressive array of new roads, railways, and
   metro lines that will ferry the massive crush of spectators and
   athletes around the chronically congested city. Other logistics seem
   likewise well in hand. The ticketing programme, organisers say, is
   proceeding smoothly. And although officials think they will need
   100,000 volunteers to help run the games, they have already received
   more than 560,000 applications.

   On the hardware side of the ledger, and especially when it comes to
   the venues themselves, it would seem every detail has indeed been
   attended to. Not only will all 37 venues be completed well in advance,
   officials promise, but they will be ready for any contingency. What
   if, for example, rain threatens to turn the Olympic beach-volleyball
   court into a mud pit? Never fear: after scouring the nation and
   testing different sand varieties for their water drainage properties,
   planners have located the very finest grains on distant Hainan island,
   and shipped 17,000 tonnes to Beijing.

   Despite the choking, hazy, smog-laden pall that has hung over Beijing
   for much of this summer, planners are also likely to succeed in
   bringing Beijing's notorious air pollution down to more bearable
   levels during the games. If, to achieve this or ease road congestion,
   they have to impose draconian restrictions on traffic and industrial
   activity in the weeks before the games, they will have the authority
   they need to do so. Even the weather is taken care of. Officials at
   Beijing's municipal Weather Modification Office say the timely
   launching of chemicals into the atmosphere will allow them to dispel
   clouds and largely control the time and place of rainfall.

   The government seems far less prepared, however, when it comes to the
   delicate business of handling the activists and pressure groups that
   are sure to use the event as a soapbox for their many and varied
   criticisms of its policies. Whether to do with labour rights,
   religious freedom, the mistreatment of ethnic minorities or general
   political repression, there is no shortage of causes, and no shortage
   of champions prepared to take advantage of the Olympic spotlight.

   The city already had a foretaste of this in the week marking the
   launch of the one-year countdown. At the Great Wall, on the outskirts
   of Beijing, a group of Tibetans from Britain, Canada and America
   displayed a huge banner proclaiming, "One World, One Dream, Free Tibet
   2008". The slogan plays on Beijing's official Olympic motto, "One
   World, One Dream". A similar protest was mounted (and a similar banner
   unfurled) in April, at the Mount Everest base camp in Tibet.

   In central Beijing, meanwhile, another international pressure group,
   Reporters Without Borders, conducted a small but colourful
   demonstration on August 6th outside the Olympic headquarters, accusing
   China of doing little to honour the promises it has been making about
   press and political freedom since it was chosen in 2001 to host the
   games. At the start of the year the foreign ministry instituted new
   and more liberal rules for foreign journalists working in China. It
   seems not, however, to have informed all the police. At the
   demonstration on August 6th, some foreign reporters were roughed up
   and detained on the spot for an hour.

   The government this week repeated its "resolute opposition to the
   politicisation of the Olympics". But it is not only foreign critics of
   China who are testing that resolve. In a brave open letter, a group of
   prominent Chinese activists and intellectuals--former political
   prisoners among them--took their own liberties with the official
   slogan. Entitled "One World, One Dream, Universal Human Rights", the
   letter was addressed to China's leaders as well as heads of
   international organisations including the United Nations and the
   International Olympic Committee.

   "We find no consolation or comfort", wrote the dissidents, "in the
   rise of grandiose sports facilities, or a temporarily beautified
   Beijing city, or the prospect of Chinese athletes winning medals. We
   know too well how these glories are built on the ruins of the lives of
   ordinary people."

   Such a letter is cause for concern for China's leadership, for more
   reasons than one. Not only does it give the lie to any argument that
   agitation over human rights is limited to meddling, ill-intentioned
   foreigners, but it also signals that the internal propaganda
   objectives of the Olympic endeavour may not be so easy to meet as had
   seemed likely.

   Much of the world assumes--with justification--that China hopes to use
   the games as a global coming-out party, raising its international
   profile and softening its image. But another important goal is to
   convey to the domestic audience that China has the stature and ability
   to take its place at the centre of the world stage. Neither goal will
   be well served next year by ham-fisted responses to criticism.


   Golly: the Dear Leader won't come clean about his bombs 


   ANOTHER deadline, another disappointment. Last February North Korea
   agreed with four of its neighbours and the United States to give up
   its ambitions as a nuclear power in return for lashings of aid and
   rehabilitation from its standing as an international pariah. Crucial
   to the deal was North Korea's subsequent promise to declare all its
   nuclear activities by December 31st. The deadline came. It went. From
   Pyongyang, not a squeak.

   Though hardly out of keeping for such a secretive, recalcitrant
   regime, the silence has generated unease, even embarrassment, among
   North Korea's counterparts in the six-party talks hosted by China,
   which, typically, described the hold-up as "natural". But the
   administration of President George Bush reversed a once hostile policy
   in the past year in an attempt to prove that engagement with North
   Korea, even after it let off a nuclear bomb, could work. America's
   patience will have limits.

   For now it will not sound the alarm. After all, an earlier part of the
   deal, the closure of the Soviet-era nuclear reactor at Yongbyon in
   July, came three months later than promised. Since then American
   inspectors have moved into Yongbyon to see that it is disabled and
   eventually dismantled. December 31st was also meant to be the deadline
   for Yongbyon's disablement, which was missed as well. But this week
   America was at pains to stress North Korean technical co-operation. If
   anything, it said, the delay was because of its own insistence that
   due care be taken in removing the thousands of fuel rods from the
   ageing reactor.

   A few weeks' delay in the declaration of North Korea's nuclear
   programmes would be tolerable. Any longer and the six-party process
   would be in trouble. For the nuclear programmes are the crux of the
   matter. Declaring them was never going to come easily to Kim Jong Il,
   North Korea's "Dear Leader". His nuclear weapons, however few and
   feeble, provide his only leverage against the world. Yet America is
   unlikely to stand for any bluff--not least because of suspicions that
   a Syrian site bombed by Israel in September was a nuclear facility
   that had North Korean help.

   The questions now are not only how much plutonium North Korea has
   extracted and how many warheads it has made. The Bush administration
   also wants to know the scale of the programme to enrich uranium to
   which North Korea admitted in 2002. Earlier claims by America about
   its scale seem exaggerated; still, it has evidence that Pakistan's
   nuclear racketeer, Abdul Qadeer Khan (see [4]article), sold the North
   uranium-enriching gear.

   Hitherto, those in the six-party talks have given North Korea the
   benefit of the doubt: only Japan has been openly sceptical about the
   North's sincerity--at least until it has come clean about the Japanese
   kidnapped by the regime in the 1970s and 1980s. Now Mr Kim may face a
   hardening of the ranks. However badly Mr Bush needs a foreign-policy
   success, he will not move towards normalising relations with North
   Korea before nuclear progress. As for South Korea, President Roh
   Moo-hyun has until now seen no evil; yet even his foreign minister now
   admits that dealing with a nuclear North Korea is a Sisyphean task.
   What is more, Mr Roh steps down next month and his conservative
   successor, Lee Myung-bak, is no fan of "sunshine diplomacy". He
   promotes a harder line to the North: aid and investment from Seoul
   should follow nuclear disablement.

   Mr Kim may yet come clean on his programmes, and denuclearisation
   continue apace. If he doesn't, it is not obvious what the world can do
   about it.


   China's economy is smaller than was thought

   AMERICANS may well be delighted by new figures that show China's GDP
   is 40% smaller than previously thought. Has the devious Beijing
   government been massaging the numbers, as communist planners are wont
   to do? Hardly. China's GDP in yuan terms remains unchanged. What has
   happened is that the World Bank has changed the calculations it uses
   to make international comparisons of the size of economies.

   Converting a poor country's GDP into dollars at market exchange rates
   can understate the true size because a dollar buys much more in an
   emerging market such as China than it does in America. The IMF and the
   World Bank therefore prefer to convert GDPs into dollars using
   purchasing-power parities (or PPPs), which take account of price
   differences between countries.

   Previous estimates of China's PPP were largely guesswork. Now the
   World Bank has produced new calculations based on a survey of prices
   of over 1,000 goods and services in 146 countries, including China for
   the first time. On this basis, China's GDP in 2005 was $5.3 trillion,
   compared with $2.2 trillion using market exchange rates and $8.9
   trillion using previous PPP estimates. This was still well below
   America's $12.4 trillion that year (see chart).

   But this does not mean China's economic miracle has been just a
   statistical artefact. The revisions do not reduce China's growth
   rate--the fastest over 30 years of any large country in history. It
   remains the world's largest producer and consumer of steel, the
   second-biggest user of energy and even on revised figures the world's
   second-largest economy. In 2008 it is almost certain to overtake
   Germany as the world's largest exporter, and assuming recent rates of
   growth are sustained, within ten years it will overtake America (in
   PPP terms) as the world's largest economy.

   China itself has always played down the PPP numbers, hoping to portray
   itself as a poor country so America will give it more leeway when
   arguing about exchange rates and trade. China's policymakers will not
   be unhappy with their new, slimline figure. Indians, in contrast, love
   to boast that their GDP overtook Japan's in 2006 to become the world's
   third-biggest. Unfortunately, this is no longer true: its GDP has also
   been slashed by almost 40%.

   With Brazil's GDP also down a bit, the share of emerging economies in
   world output (including Asia's newly industrialising economies) has
   been cut to 46% in 2005, compared with over 50% on the old numbers.
   Their economic dominance has merely been postponed.

   rights reserved.

   IFRAME:
   [4]http://switch.atdmt.com/iaction/oy6ats_EconomistcomLandingPage_1

   [activity;src=1245986;type=econo981;cat=e09as761;ord=1?]

   IFRAME:
   [5]http://ad.n2434.doubleclick.net/activity;src=1113415;type=2ndli341;
   cat=world756;ord=1;num=1?

References

   1. http://ad.doubleclick.net/jump/main.economist.com/printer;pos=1;sect=world;sect=p_top;sect=d_top;sect=world_p_top;sect=world_d_top;sz=468x60;tile=1;dcopt=ist;ord=87308391?
   2. http://www.economist.com/index.cfm
   3. http://www.economist.com/background/displayBackground.cfm?story_id=8993729
   4. http://switch.atdmt.com/iaction/oy6ats_EconomistcomLandingPage_1
   5. http://ad.n2434.doubleclick.net/activity;src=1113415;type=2ndli341;cat=world756;ord=1;num=1?

                                                                   Landov

                                   Landov

   India's government is threatening to make companies hire more
   low-caste workers 


   A 23-YEAR-OLD dressed in white pyjama trousers and a black over-shirt
   represents two worlds in India that know almost nothing of each other.
   One is fast growing, but tiny: the world of business. Strolling
   through the Californian-style campus in Bangalore that serves as the
   headquarters of Infosys, a computer-services company, she grins and
   declares herself glad. Her brother, she adds shyly, is so proud that
   she is an "Infoscion".

   He is in the rural world where 70% of Indians reside: cultivating the
   family plot in Bannahalli Hundi, a village near Mysore. Life is less
   delightful there. Half the 4,000 population are brahmins, of the Hindu
   priestly caste. The rest, including the software engineer and her
   family, are dalits, members of a "scheduled caste" that was once
   considered untouchable.

   Sixty years on this is still the case in Bannahalli Hundi, says the
   young woman, who does not want to be named. She has never entered the
   house of a brahmin neighbour. When a dalit was recently hired to cook
   at the village school, brahmins withdrew their children. Has there
   been no weakening of caste strictures in her lifetime? "I have not
   seen it," she says.

   The tale is in startling contrast to Infosys's modernity, and she is
   embarrassed by it. But it partly explains how she came to be hired by
   a company that is considered to be one of India's best. She is the
   beneficiary of a charitable training scheme for dalit
   university-leavers that Infosys launched last year.

   In collaboration with the elite Bangalore-based International
   Institute of Information Technology (IIIT), Infosys is providing
   special training to low-caste engineering graduates who have failed to
   get a job in its industry. The training, which lasts seven months,
   does not promise employment. But of the 89 who completed the first
   course in May, all but four have found jobs. Infosys hired 17.

   The charity was born of a threat. India's Congress-led government has
   told companies to hire more dalits and members of tribal communities.
   Together these groups represent around a quarter of India's population
   and half of its poor. Manmohan Singh, the prime minister, has given
   warning that "strong measures" will be taken if companies do not
   comply. Many interpret that to mean the government will impose
   caste-based hiring quotas.

   Quotas already apply in education and government, where since 1950
   22.5% of university places and government jobs have been "reserved"
   for dalits and tribal people. In addition, since 1993, 27% of
   government jobs have been reserved for members of the Other Backward
   Classes (OBCs)--castes only slightly higher up the Hindu hierarchy.

   Promoting the wretched

   This is not enough for supporters of reservations. Since the
   introduction of liberal reforms in the early 1990s, public-sector
   hiring has slowed and businesses have boomed. Extending reservations
   to companies, they argue, would therefore safeguard an existing policy
   of promoting the Hindu wretched. It would almost certainly require
   changes to the constitution. But low-caste politicians are delighted
   by the prospect, so it could happen.

   The chief minister of Uttar Pradesh, a dalit leader called Mayawati,
   has said 30% of company jobs should be reserved for dalits, members of
   the OBCs and high-caste and Muslim poor. Chandra Bhan Prasad, a dalit
   journalist, applauds this and argues that it would be in the interest
   of companies. "It is in the culture of dalits that they are least
   likely to change their employment because they are so loyal to their
   masters," he says. It would also help them become a "new caste [sic]
   of consumers".

   Businessmen are unconvinced. Government, in both its intrusiveness and
   its incompetence, is a hindrance to them. Caste-based hiring quotas
   would be just another burden. People given a right to a job tend not
   to work very hard. So, in an effort to avert Mr Singh's threat, many
   companies and organisations that represent them are launching their
   own affirmative-action schemes.

   The Confederation of Indian Industry has introduced a package of
   dalit-friendly measures, including scholarships for bright low-caste
   students. The Federation of Indian Chambers of Commerce and Industry
   plans to support entrepreneurs in India's poorest districts.
   [4]Naukri.com, India's biggest online recruitment service, with over
   10m subscribers, anticipates that companies will soon actively seek
   low-caste recruits. It has therefore started asking job-seekers to
   register their caste.

   Basic training

   Infosys's training scheme, as described by S. Sadagopan, the IIIT'S
   director, is a Pygmalion undertaking. Meeting the parents of his dalit
   students, he saw "almost an anger in their eyes". For the first month
   the students were unresponsive. Their English was dismal. Mr Sadagopan
   felt compelled to introduce lessons in self-presentation, including
   table manners.

   Matters improved. The course was based on Infosys's 16-week basic
   training, which 31,000 Indian graduates underwent last year. The
   low-caste lot scored similar marks and gained confidence. At a bonding
   session, filled with meditation and dancing, they wrote themselves a
   slogan: "As good as any, better than many".

   It is a moving story. But Mr Sadagopan's students were not all that
   deprived. In the words of three, now working for Infosys, they were
   "normal middle-class Indians". A third of them were the sons and
   daughters of professionals. The worst had grades only a little below
   what Infosys routinely demands of its recruits. Almost all were from
   urban areas, where caste discrimination is rare.

   One of them, Manjunath, says the only time he was ever reminded of his
   low caste was when he applied for a place at university. Had it not
   been reserved for him, he says, he might have worked a bit harder--and
   so joined Infosys without any special help. As for his colleague from
   Bannahalli Hundi, coming from one of the richer families in the
   village, she is its first female university graduate--of any caste.

   The most that can be said for Infosys's programme--without devaluing
   Mr Sadagopan's efforts--is that it is a great opportunity for a tiny
   number of middle-class Indians, who happen also to be low-caste. The
   same would be true of caste-based reservations. This is because the
   percentage of India's workforce employed in the "organised" private
   sector (made up of firms that declare they have ten or more
   employees), where reservations might be applied, is also tiny: around
   2%. And as far as anyone can tell (companies do not ask the caste of
   their employees), members of low castes are already well represented
   in low-skilled jobs there. Much of India's heavy industry, such as
   steelmaking, is located where the low-caste population is high. Tata
   Steel, which employs around 40,000 people in India, has its main
   operations in Jamshedpur, in the eastern "tribal belt".

   Membership of a caste, as of a guild or a church, provides businessmen
   with a useful network. In the informal economy, where banks fear to
   tread, caste bonds tend to be affirmed through business. The fact that
   most Indian companies are family-owned exaggerates this: to prevent
   wealth being diluted, it encourages marriages not only within the same
   caste, but also within the same family. A sugar baroness of south
   India's kamma caste, Rajshree Pathy, recently explained this practice
   to an Indian newspaper, the Business Standard: "The PSG family
   produces girls, the Lakshmi Mills family produces boys, they marry
   each other and live happily ever after."

   The modernisation of India's economy has brought more dynamic change.
   Among educated, urban Indians caste identity is fading. Inter-caste
   marriages are increasing. According to [5]Jeevansathi.com, a
   matchmaking (or, as Indians say, "matrimonial") website, 58% of its
   online matches involved inter-caste couples. Meanwhile, in rural
   India--where unions are not fixed online--intra-caste marriages remain
   the norm.

   Business has to some degree been a laggard in this process. Caste
   bonds rooted in expediency, not tradition, allow businessmen to borrow
   and lend money with a degree of accountability, which helps to
   minimise risk. They are not an affirmation of a vocational hierarchy
   within the Hindu universe. Nonetheless, in north India, where business
   is to this day dominated by members of ancient trading castes, like
   marwaris (whose famous names include Birla, Bajaj and Mittal) and
   bania (Ambani), it can look pretty traditional.

   Rites of passage

   Harish Damodaran investigated the caste origins of many of India's
   industrialists in a forthcoming book[6]*. He identified three main
   trends. The first, which he calls a "bazaar to factory" route, is the
   passage of hereditary traders into industry. In northern India, some
   castes' monopolies have discouraged them from leaving their
   traditionally prescribed employment. So members of north India's
   farming castes--for example, jats and yadavs--rarely own a sugar or
   flour mill.

   The second trend, "office to factory", describes a recent movement of
   well-educated high-caste Hindus, including brahmins, into business.
   Lacking capital, these sophisticates tended to enter the services
   sector, where start-up costs are relatively low. India's world-class
   computer-services industry, including companies like Infosys, is the
   result.

   The third trajectory, "field to factory", is the transition into the
   business world of members of India's middle and lower-peasant castes.
   This must be the path of India's dalits, too. But they have not
   trodden it yet: across India, Mr Damodaran could not find a
   significant dalit industrialist.

   There is no strong evidence that companies discriminate against
   low-caste job applicants. Upper-class Indians, who tend also to be
   high-caste Hindus, can be disparaging about their low-caste
   compatriots. "Once a thicky, always a thicky," is how a rich
   businessman describes Ms Mayawati. Yet this at least partly reflects
   the fact that low-caste Hindus tend also to be low class; and in
   India, as in many countries, class prejudice is profound.

   There is, on the other hand, plenty of evidence that few able
   low-caste graduates are emerging from India's universities. Since it
   began registering the caste of its subscribers--almost by definition
   computer-literate and English-speaking--[7]Naukri.com has added 38,000
   young dalit and tribal job-seekers to its books. That represents 1% of
   the total who have registered in that time.

   For reservationists, this confirms the need for quotas. Others
   interpret the facts differently: reservations don't seem to work. And
   statistics support this view. Reservations notwithstanding, low-caste
   Indians are getting less poor at almost the same rate as the general
   population. Between 1983 and 2004, their spending power increased by
   26.7%, compared with 27.7% for the average Indian, according to the
   National Sample Survey Organisation, a government body.

   Low-caste students struggle in schools without special help, which is
   rarely available. Their English--the language of India's middle
   class--tends to be poor. Many drop out. Up to half of university
   places reserved for low-caste students are left vacant. So, too, are
   many of the university posts reserved for low-caste teachers. Most
   Indians emerge from this system with an abysmal education. Low-caste
   Indians perhaps almost invariably do.

   A measure of this fiasco can be found at the political-science
   department of one of India's prestigious post-graduate universities.
   Each year it chooses 50 students, from 1,500 applications, for its
   master's degree. Successful applicants will average no less than 55%
   in their undergraduate exams. Dalit applicants scrape in with as
   little as 30%. Nonetheless, practically every student will be awarded
   a first-class degree.

   India is failing to equip its young, of whatever caste or religion,
   with the skills that its companies need. This is one of the biggest
   threats to sustaining high economic growth. India's outstanding
   computer-services companies--which will account for around a quarter
   of overall growth in the next few years--intend to hire over 1m
   engineering graduates in the next two years. It will be tough. To
   recruit 31,000 graduates last year, Infosys considered 1.3m
   applicants; only 65,000 passed a basic test. To address the skills
   shortage, the company is investing a whopping $450m in training. "We
   are building India's human resources," says Mohandas Pai, Infosys's
   chief of human resources.

   Alas, reservationists have other concerns. Caste politics are
   pervasive. On August 28th the Supreme Court struck down an effort by
   Andhra Pradesh's government to reserve 4% of government jobs and
   education places for poor Muslims. The court is meanwhile weighing a
   more dramatic measure announced by the government last year: to
   reserve 27% of university places for the OBCs. To placate irate
   students, many of them high-caste, the government promises to increase
   the number of university places accordingly. Education standards would
   no doubt fall further.

   Even so, the policy may be unstoppable. Since reservations for the
   OBCs were introduced in the early 1990s the rise of political parties
   dedicated to these groups has been inexorable. So has the
   proliferation of the OBCs, to around 3,000 castes. They include
   millions who are not poor at all.

   "A massive deliberate confusion" is how Surjit Bhalla, an economist at
   Oxus Investments, a hedge fund, characterises reservations for the
   OBCs. When they were awarded reservations, the OBCs were estimated to
   make up 53% of India's total population. More recent counting suggests
   they are only about one-third of the population, although their 27%
   reservation remains unchanged. Moreover, by most measures, the average
   OBC member is no poorer than the average Indian. "How can you
   discriminate against the average?" asks Mr Bhalla, despairingly.

   There by mistake

   And despair he may. Practically no politician dares speak out against
   this caste-based racket for fear of being labelled an apologist for
   the caste system. Rather like guests at the Hotel California, those
   that join the list never leave--even one or two castes that were
   allegedly included by mistake. The surpassing example is Tamil Nadu,
   which reserves a total of 69% of government jobs: 1% for tribal
   people, 18% for dalits, 30% for the OBCs and 20% for a subset of
   them--members of castes once categorised by British colonisers as
   "criminal tribes" and now known more delicately as "de-notified
   communities".

   There is little opposition to this policy in Tamil Nadu, for two
   reasons. It is one of India's more literate and prosperous states. And
   low-caste Hindus are unusually prominent in Tamil Nadu, which suggests
   to reservationists that the policy is working well. Textiles companies
   in Tirupur, a T-shirt hub, for example, are mostly owned by gounders,
   members of a peasant caste that is officially listed as an OBC.

   One defender of the policy is N. Vasudevan, chief official of the
   Kafkaesque vision of bureaucratic hell that is the Backward Classes,
   Most Backward Classes and Minorities Welfare Department in Chennai,
   where workers languish behind mountains of never-opened files. Asked
   when it might end he replies: "When everyone becomes equal."

   There is an alternative view: that Tamil Nadu is more equal than most
   states not because it has lots of reservations but because, overall,
   it has been run less badly. It has therefore delivered above-average
   economic growth, from which low-caste Tamils have benefited.

   In addition, low-caste businessmen in Tamil Nadu have had
   opportunities that have nothing to do with government policy. In
   contrast to north India, where commerce is dominated by members of a
   few business castes, south India's business community has been more
   open to members of non-business castes. According to Raman Mahadevan,
   a business historian, this is partly because members of the south's
   main trading caste, the chettiars, chose to concentrate their
   investments outside India during the 19th century, in Malaya and
   Singapore.

   Partly as a result, little large-scale industry emerged in southern
   India until the 1930s. Around the same time, a popular movement
   against brahmins--especially lordly in the south--emboldened members
   of the lower and middle castes, including gounders, who were quick to
   convert their new assertiveness into business.

   The Hindu caste system has never been rigid. Low-caste Hindus do not
   accept their lumpen position in the hierarchy. Indeed, like
   middle-class English families, they tend to cherish a myth of their
   former greatness. By imitating the habits of a more prestigious
   neighbour, in dress or ritual, some low castes have sneaked a rung or
   two up the ladder. More recently, in an effort to be classified as an
   OBC or a dalit caste, some middle-ranking castes have tried to climb a
   rung or two down.

   Meanwhile, on the lowest rung of the ladder, dalit businessmen can be
   found operating in the informal economy, perhaps as small traders.
   They must be especially reliant on caste as a business network. But
   that reliance will change if they can expand into the organised
   sector. Where businessmen can gain access to credit without having to
   claim kinship, caste affiliations wither. As Mr Damodaran writes: "A
   kamma sugar magnate ultimately identifies his interests with other
   mill-owners and not with fellow kamma cane growers or workers." And
   his business may flourish, unfettered.
   [gray.gif]

   * "India's New Capitalists: Caste, Business and Industry in a Modern
   Nation-State." By Harish Damodaran. Permanent Black/Palgrave
   Macmillan.

   rights reserved.

   IFRAME:
   [4]http://switch.atdmt.com/iaction/oy6ats_EconomistcomLandingPage_1

   [activity;src=1245986;type=econo981;cat=e09as761;ord=1?]

   IFRAME:
   [5]http://ad.n2434.doubleclick.net/activity;src=1113415;type=2ndli341;
   cat=world756;ord=1;num=1?

References

   1. http://ad.doubleclick.net/jump/main.economist.com/printer;pos=1;sect=world;sect=p_top;sect=d_top;sect=world_p_top;sect=world_d_top;sz=468x60;tile=1;dcopt=ist;ord=98908109?
   2. http://www.economist.com/index.cfm
   3. http://www.economist.com/background/displayBackground.cfm?story_id=9250206
   4. http://switch.atdmt.com/iaction/oy6ats_EconomistcomLandingPage_1
   5. http://ad.n2434.doubleclick.net/activity;src=1113415;type=2ndli341;cat=world756;ord=1;num=1?

   Beijing blocks open elections in Hong Kong until at least 2017


   TO DIM the impact of what it had to know would be unpopular news,
   China's government waited until the Saturday evening of the New Year's
   weekend to reveal its long-awaited reaction to Hong Kong's petition
   for a democratic government. The answer came in two forms. There was a
   long, muddled, pledge that appeared to honour the request by setting a
   timetable for a direct popular election for the territory's "chief
   executive". And there was a tough underlying message: no such election
   until two more five-year chief-executive terms have been completed,
   ie, until 2017, if then; and all candidates will have to be approved
   by the central government. Democracy, in short, only in name.
   Similarly, it will not be until 2020, at the earliest, that Hong
   Kong's citizens will have the right to elect directly all the members
   of the city's legislature.

   The decision follows a lengthy study by the Hong Kong government and,
   no doubt, lengthy consideration in Beijing. Local opinion polls show
   huge support among Hong Kong citizens for democracy. A recent
   by-election for one of the directly elected seats in the legislature
   resulted in a symbolically important victory for a pro-democracy
   candidate, Anson Chan, the territory's most senior civil servant
   during the handover from British rule a decade ago. But the Chinese
   government and its supporters have recently taken an increasingly
   chauvinistic line. Pro-mainland papers hammered Mrs Chan. A mild
   opinion piece by a long-time democracy advocate, Martin Lee, in the
   Wall Street Journal, urging countries to push for human rights during
   the Beijing Olympics later this year, led to his being pilloried in
   terms reminiscent of the Cultural Revolution: "Traitor Lee!"; "Running
   dog!"

   In protest at China's electoral timetable, there was a lightly
   attended bicycle rally on January 1st. A bigger rally is planned for
   January 13th. But it is unlikely that the turnout will match the
   hundreds of thousands who protested in 2003 against proposed
   restrictions on civil liberties. At the time, SARS, a respiratory
   disease, was raging, the economy was in a funk and discontent
   widespread. Now, times are good. Restaurants are packed and
   unemployment low. The present chief executive, Donald Tsang, was
   installed by China in 2005 and so bears the burden of being a puppet.
   But he is respected as a capable administrator and would have won
   re-election in a popular election in 2007 if one had been held. To
   some extent, mollifying China is considered part of the job.

   Now Mr Tsang will have to come up with an electoral plan for the
   coming years that will placate public impatience but not alarm China.
   This may not be possible. So he has given warning that heated argument
   might jeopardise Hong Kong's "stability and development". This threat
   is not taken lightly. The city prides itself on functioning
   efficiently in an often chaotic continent. Of course, the best way to
   ensure continued stability would be to let the people of Hong Kong run
   their own city. But Beijing is loth to let democracy take root in this
   "Special Administrative Region" lest it sets a precedent elsewhere in
   China.


                                                                       AP

                                     AP

   South Korea's Roh Moo-hyun plays down expectations for an historic
   summit

   GLIDING across the border in a 30-limousine convoy, Roh Moo-hyun,
   South Korea's president, will on October 2nd visit Pyongyang and meet
   North Korea's capo, Kim Jong Il, for three days of talks. It is only
   the second summit between the two sides since their estrangement in a
   civil war over half a century ago.

   The first, seven years ago, was between Mr Kim and Mr Roh's
   predecessor, Kim Dae-jung, who launched a "sunshine policy" towards
   the North. The meeting generated euphoria among South Koreans and won
   their president a Nobel peace prize, but produced little else. Kim
   Jong Il never came to Seoul, as he promised he would. Relations
   deteriorated between North Korea and the United States, South Korea's
   protector. And last year the North tested a nuclear bomb, to the
   region's dismay. As for the summit itself, it later transpired it was
   bought with cash passed under the table to the Dear Leader.

   Mr Roh knows things have changed. The national mood towards
   reconciliation is subdued, even sceptical. Lacking Kim Dae-jung's
   charisma, his own political authority is at rock-bottom, after an
   ineffective presidency; he stands down at the end of the year. The
   only constant is that the summit's agenda is whatever Mr Kim decides
   it will be, and that he is not letting on: so, as one of Mr Roh's
   advisers delicately puts it, the summit is "open-ended".

   While dampening expectations, Mr Roh clearly hopes for a breakthrough
   in one or more of three areas: in reducing tensions and furthering
   peace on the Korean peninsula; deeper economic co-operation with the
   benighted North; and reconciliation of the many thorny issues--such as
   the tens of thousands of families separated since the Korean war--that
   might bring the distant goal of unification a tad closer. Above
   anything, Mr Roh appears to want to come home waving a scrap of paper
   with "peace" written on it.

   Hawks, particularly in America, say that Mr Roh's ambitions risk
   running ahead of the "six-party" process in which America, China,
   Japan, Russia and South Korea are hoping to get North Korea to abandon
   its nuclear ambitions. Too much offered by the South might lead the
   North to hope for aid without scrapping its nuclear programmes. It is
   not certain that Mr Roh will even bring up the nuclear issue with Mr
   Kim. Meanwhile, say some of Mr Roh's critics, peace with the North is
   a matter for all the former combatants of the Korean war, China and
   America included.

   Mr Roh's men deny there is any risk. The president's hopes for
   economic co-operation and reconciliation are being entertained only
   because of progress on denuclearisation, they say; in July, North
   Korea closed its Soviet-era reactor at Yongbyon and has since promised
   to declare and disable all its programmes by the end of the year. They
   argue that it will do the liberal Mr Roh no favours if he returns with
   a deal that is unacceptable to his successor as president (the clear
   favourite is Lee Myung-bak, whose right-wing Grand National Party has
   a harder line towards North Korea). As for economic co-operation, says
   a close adviser, it has been far too one-sided to date, with North
   Korea simply taking South Korean money, fuel-oil and rice, much of
   which finds its way to the armed forces. From now on, the South
   expects much more--starting with the chance to invest in the North's
   rich mineral resources and cheap labour. To press home the point,
   two-dozen business executives will accompany Mr Roh.

   Some expect the North to go surprisingly far. Chung-in Moon of Yonsei
   University, an architect of the "sunshine policy", argues that
   decrepit North Korea is on the brink of opening up just as China did
   three decades ago, because Kim Jong Il recognises that his legitimacy
   now rests on future prosperity.

   But outside help is hard to imagine without progress on the nuclear
   issue. The United States classes North Korea as an enemy; it also
   brands the country as a state sponsor of terrorism. Both hobble North
   Korea's ability to trade. America offers to lift these curses in
   return for a real disablement of North Korea's nuclear capabilities.

   On September 27th the six-party talks reconvened in Beijing. Their
   outlook was clouded by a mysterious recent Israeli air strike at a
   Syrian target that some claimed was a North Korea-assisted nuclear
   facility. North Korea vigorously denies this and American diplomats
   say they have seen no intelligence confirming it. Negotiators, wanting
   nothing to distract North Korea from a timetable for denuclearisation,
   are inclined to gloss over the matter. For the timetable, as it is,
   involves some quite devilish details.


   Labor is working. Non-stop


   WHEN he led Australia's Labor Party to a resounding election victory
   last November, Kevin Rudd warned members of his new cabinet they could
   expect just two days off at Christmas. Even for a workaholic such as
   Mr Rudd, this proved optimistic. Australia traditionally sinks into a
   summer slumber in January. The new prime minister wisely reconsidered
   and took a two-week holiday himself. Back at work on January 14th, he
   at once sent signals that he plans to be as stingy with taxpayers'
   money as he expects his ministers to be with their free time.

   The next day he and Wayne Swan, the treasurer (finance minister),
   visited the Sydney headquarters of Australia's independent central
   bank. Mr Swan explained that the meeting was all about showing
   government "restraint" in a bid to tame inflation. Labor took power
   with a mandate to change the political climate. But the economy looms
   as its biggest worry.

   After more than 16 consecutive years of growth, some measures of
   inflation are running at about 3% a year. The central bank has raised
   interest rates six times since 2004; economists predict another rise
   in February. On top of these, Australia's big retail banks have raised
   their rates in response to the global credit crunch.

   A survey this week showed a sharp fall in consumer confidence. Mr
   Rudd's ministers will finger the former conservative government of
   John Howard. Over 11 years in power, especially the past three, Mr
   Howard was prone to splashing money around to buy votes. All this will
   make it hard for Mr Rudd to meet his own election promise to pour
   money into health and education, and to phase in tax cuts worth A$31
   billion ($28 billion). Mr Swan has already pledged to cut A$10 billion
   from spending in his first budget in May.

   On foreign policy, Mr Rudd has shown he means business in taking a
   less blustery and less pro-American approach in Australia's region.
   After his election, the first foreign leader Mr Rudd invited to his
   Brisbane home was Helen Clark, the prime minister of New Zealand. Then
   he went to the UN climate-change conference in Bali and reversed the
   Howard government's refusal to ratify the Kyoto protocol.

   On January 15th the government also reversed Mr Howard's decision to
   sell uranium to India. Australia holds about 40% of the world's known
   uranium, and the deal was less about commerce than about backing an
   American agreement on civil nuclear co-operation with India. It went
   against the grain of Australia's refusal up to then to sell uranium to
   India and other countries that had not signed the Nuclear
   Non-Proliferation Treaty.

   For all this, Mr Rudd remains possibly the most enigmatic prime
   minister Australians have elected. The real balance of conservative,
   reformer and radical in him remains to be discovered once Parliament
   resumes in February. He has ordained already that Parliament will sit
   for five days a week instead of four. Reluctantly granted a holiday in
   January, his ministers can expect little sleep for the rest of the
   year.

   rights reserved.

   IFRAME:
   [4]http://switch.atdmt.com/iaction/oy6ats_EconomistcomLandingPage_1

   [activity;src=1245986;type=econo981;cat=e09as761;ord=1?]

   IFRAME:
   [5]http://ad.n2434.doubleclick.net/activity;src=1113415;type=2ndli341;
   cat=world756;ord=1;num=1?

References

   1. http://ad.doubleclick.net/jump/main.economist.com/printer;pos=1;sect=world;sect=p_top;sect=d_top;sect=world_p_top;sect=world_d_top;sz=468x60;tile=1;dcopt=ist;ord=74724429?
   2. http://www.economist.com/index.cfm
   3. http://www.economist.com/background/displayBackground.cfm?story_id=10342348
   4. http://switch.atdmt.com/iaction/oy6ats_EconomistcomLandingPage_1
   5. http://ad.n2434.doubleclick.net/activity;src=1113415;type=2ndli341;cat=world756;ord=1;num=1?

   Big Brother's CCTV

   GEORGE ORWELL wrote of the Ministry of Truth (in his novel, "1984")
   that it was "startlingly different from any other object in sight".
   The same applies to China Central Television's new headquarters in
   Beijing. It is one of the world's biggest and most architecturally
   ambitious buildings, often described as a twisted doughnut with two
   leaning towers connected by an impossible looking L-shaped overhang.

   The edifice was designed by Rem Koolhaas, a Dutch architect whose
   company's [3]website describes the building (Orwellianism not
   intended) as "a canopy that symbolically embraces the entire
   population". The state-owned broadcaster's move from an obscure part
   of western Beijing to a new international business district highlights
   its global aspirations.

   For more than a year, passers-by have watched the 230-metre (750-foot)
   towers creep up at a perilous six-degree angle. On December 8th, says
   Rory McGowan of Arup, a British engineering firm in charge of the
   project, the towers were permanently joined by seven steel beams. The
   timing, at 9.30am, was important. Had it been later, uneven expansion
   of the building's frame in daylight would have resulted in stresses
   being locked in.

   The building is supposed to be ready for partial use in time for the
   Olympic Games next August and completed in 2009. Construction, says
   the broadcaster, is proceeding smoothly "under the loving care" of the
   Communist Party.

