
   WASHINGTON, DC--The Dove Campaign For Real Beauty formally announced
   Monday its 2008 nominee for president, 28-year-old Julie, a size 10.
   [4]Enlarge Image Julie 

   Naturally beautiful Dove campaign nominee Julie announces her
   candidacy.

   "My self-esteemed colleagues, American voters come in all shapes and
   sizes. When you vote for me, you vote for a celebration of diversity,"
   said Julie, a veterinary assistant from Cedar Rapids, IA, in a
   ceremony at the Washington Hilton. "My presidency will prove that you
   don't have to be a size two to build better relations with China. That
   you don't have to be skinny to lower our skyrocketing trade deficit.
   All you need is the nonjudgmental support of the American people."

   Julie added that, if elected, she would work hard to lower
   self-interest rates, help the nation focus on its strengths rather
   than its weaknesses, and mount a swift, body-positive plan to force
   Iran to abandon its nuclear program.

   The announcement--which coincided with the launch of Dove's new
   collection of intensive firming lotions, creams, and body washes--was
   followed by a gala fund-raiser attended by Real Beauty campaign
   contributors Oprah Winfrey, Katie Couric, and Ellen DeGeneres. The
   event culminated with singer Chaka Khan performing "I'm Every Woman,"
   the official campaign anthem.

   Julie, who emerged as the front-runner after beating out several
   naturally beautiful candidates at a caucus in January--including
   Stacey, an administrative assistant from La Puente, CA, and Marion, a
   homemaker and mother of two from Augusta, GA--took several years of
   Spanish in high school, enjoys riding her bike, and considers french
   fries her favorite food.

   Campaign manager Nanette Villanueva says Julie will run on three
   initiatives: a heightened emphasis on national emotional security,
   broadening cultural perceptions of beauty, and cutting long-term
   capital gains taxes.

   "This is a big country, and it takes a real woman to run it,"
   Villanueva said. "Julie loves her curves just the way they are, and
   that makes her special."

   Villanueva added: "She's got thighs, and that's what this campaign is
   all about."

   A recent poll supports Villanueva's remarks, finding more than 85
   percent of American women are dissatisfied with their bodies, and over
   half are dissatisfied with the U.S. economy.

   Yet Julie's "Healthy Agenda For America" has received only one key
   endorsement: from the powerful life-coach union. And so far only a
   small, vocal minority has come out in support of her candidacy.

   "Americans are simply not ready for a plus-size woman president," said
   political analyst Paul Koskovich. "Even though more than a third of
   the U.S. population is significantly overweight, she still has very
   wide hips."

   Among her supporters, however, Julie is an inspiration.

   "I like a candidate with some meat on her bones," said Baton Rouge,
   LA, resident Len Crewley. "I could look at those big white panties for
   four whole years, sure."

   Villanueva, meanwhile, did not deny that Julie may need to drop in
   size to see her poll numbers rise. "Julie would make a confident,
   self-assured president at any weight," she said. "But we'll look at
   the numbers after the primaries."

