
   MINNEAPOLIS--Addressing a group of incoming University of Minnesota
   freshmen at an orientation meeting Sunday, Comstock Hall resident
   assistant Marcus Nelson told students they were lucky to be living on
   his floor because, unlike the other RAs on campus, he wasn't "on a big
   power trip."
   [4]Enlarge Image Dorm RA 

   Dorm RA Marcus Nelson told his residents that as a freshman he used to
   live on this same dorm floor himself.

   Nelson, a senior beginning his second year as a resident assistant on
   the coed dormitory's fourth floor, promised the 42 new students a
   "totally laid-back, no-pressure atmosphere of mutual respect and trust
   and stuff like that" during their stay.

   "You've got a leg up on other freshmen already, because 4-North
   rocks," Nelson said. "There's amazing energy here, because we keep it
   positive."

   Added Nelson: "I only have one rule. Call me Marc, not Marcus."

   Wearing a baseball cap turned backwards and his room key on a string
   around his neck, the Mankato, MN-born education major vowed "not to
   crack down too hard" on anyone violating bans on hot plates or masking
   tape on the walls. Nelson said that, whenever possible, he preferred
   using the honor system.

   "I'm not here to come down on you," Nelson said. "I won't flip out if
   you plug in a 150-watt or larger halogen-lamp bulb. I'd ask you to get
   rid of it only because I wouldn't want you to get in trouble, not
   because I get off on bossing you around."

   "I'm also not going to write you up for playing your stereo during
   quiet hours," he added. "Just don't be really loud. I'm pretty mellow,
   but I do have a job to do. And this is just common sense, but never
   pull the fire alarm except in the event of an emergency."

   Nelson then rolled his eyes and smirked as he described the
   university's "strict" drug and alcohol ban as outlined in the student
   handbook, repeatedly reminding the dorm residents that the disclosure
   was something he "had to do."

   "I should also mention that on the first day there's a mandatory
   diversity workshop in the lounge," Nelson said. "I know it sounds like
   a bummer, but I've been to it before, and it actually makes some cool
   points. I think you might get something out of it."

   Following the orientation, Nelson mingled among the students and
   further promoted his relaxed, non-tight-ass image.

   "I might have seemed intimidating up there, but I'm chill," Nelson
   told first-year student John Andrusco. "I've got your back, man. I
   don't care what you do, just don't get me in trouble."

   Nelson also confided to freshmen Craig Szyla and Tom Luo that he
   installed the name signs on their assigned dorm rooms himself.

   "The hall director wanted us to just put your names up," Nelson said.
   "I was like, no way. You guys are way cooler than that, so I put
   Family Guy stickers on them too."

   Despite Nelson's prediction that the incoming freshmen will want to
   stay at Comstock until they graduate, University of Minnesota campus
   residency records reveal that 43 of the 46 students who lived on
   Nelson's floor during the last school year are now living off campus.

   Of the three who continue to live at Comstock, one is Nelson himself,
   the sole member of the class of 2008 still living in the dormitory.

   Though it's unlikely that the current batch of residents will have any
   extended interaction with Nelson in the coming year, he urged them to
   seek him out if they have any concerns or just want to talk.

   "Just flag me down--we could get some sodas at the union, or
   brainstorm a kick-ass bulletin board theme," Nelson said. "Or I could
   bust out the Minnesotaopoly game. Whatever, I'll be around."

   Nelson concluded his talk by wishing the students an "awesome year,"
   and asking them to please not steal furniture from the lounge and put
   it in their rooms.

   "We're really fortunate to have Marcus," freshman Dave Unger said.
   "From what he told us, he's nothing like other RAs."

