   Giants

   NEW YORK--As they come closer to their Super Bowl clash with the
   formidable Patriots--the team they nearly defeated in late
   December--the Giants are confident that they can come close to beating
   the undefeated AFC champions on football's biggest stage.

   "This team has already tasted victory against the Patriots," head
   coach Tom Coughlin said Monday. "By which I mean we were so close to
   victory that we could taste it. True, we did not actually experience
   that victory, but we came as close to beating them as anyone else has
   this season. That's the kind of team we believe we are, and I think
   the Super Bowl will prove that."

   Couglin and his assistant coaches have been painstakingly breaking
   down game films from their Week 17 meeting with New England, analyzing
   every vital, near-victorious second for anything that might help them
   come that tantalizingly close to winning for the second time in as
   many months. They acknowledge that the Patriots are very good indeed,
   but the Giants believe they can draw on the experience of that
   near-victory, the confidence they discovered in barely losing to
   undefeated New England, and the lessons learned in forcing Bill
   Belichick's juggernaut to come from 12 points behind and beat them in
   the final minutes.

   "This team really believes they can come close to winning the Super
   Bowl--very, very close," Giants quarterback Eli Manning said Tuesday
   after spending the morning watching film of his Dec. 29 home loss,
   film that laid bare the crucial interception he threw to Pats corner
   Ellis Hobbs. "We can come so close to beating them, so very,
   heartbreakingly close, that every player here will take it to their
   graves."

   "This will be one to tell my kids about, that's for sure," Michael
   Strahan said. "If we can pull it off and almost beat these guys,
   they'll be showing those highlights until the end of time. When I die
   and come before those Pearly Gates, St. Peter himself will look down
   at me and say 'So, Michael, what was it like to be an eyelash away
   from winning that Super Bowl against those Patriots?' And Heaven
   itself will hold its breath while I tell them how we almost did it."

   Meanwhile, in Foxborough, the Patriots are being careful not to give
   the Giants any bulletin-board material.

   "Yeah, they good, they good," wideout Randy Moss said when told of the
   Giants attitude. "They got a good team. I guess we can't get too upset
   if they think they can nearly pull it off. Plus, hey, you got to
   admit, it ain't bragging if it's true. And they did nearly almost come
   close to practically beating us, come to think of it."

   "Didn't, though," Moss added. "18 and oh, baby!"

   Still, the Giants refuse to be completely intimidated.

   "We stood up to them once, hit 'em in the mouth, and made them beat
   us," Coughlin said, noting that in the previous meeting, the Giants
   defense put the Patriots in the challenging position of having to
   score three times over the last 20 minutes of the game, which the
   Patriots naturally did with time to spare and without apparent effort.
   "And mark my words, that's what we're going to do in the Super
   Bowl--meet their strengths with ours, play as hard and as fast as we
   can, and force them to eventually beat us."

   "Oh, crap," Coughlin added. "Crap. We're going to lose the Super
   Bowl."

