
   BOSTON--Nobel Peace Prize winner and Holocaust survivor Elie Wiesel
   said in an interview Monday that he recently revisited his debut work,
   Night, nearly 50 years after its publication and was "absolutely
   horrified" at the amateurish quality of the memoir.
   [4]Enlarge Image Elie Wiesel 

   "Why didn't my editor do something?"

   Elie Wiesel, author

   "It was painful to read," Wiesel said of the story of his journey from
   his childhood home to the Nazi death camp Auschwitz. "I know every
   great author says they hate their first book, but frankly, I'm
   embarrassed this ever made it into print. The sentence structure is
   artless, the plot is repetitive at best--and the constant mentioning
   of how I felt abandoned by God? What was the point of all that?"

   Wiesel said that, although Night is not his only work that deals with
   his personal experience of the Holocaust, it is by far his "most
   humiliating."

   "I got so wrapped up in what I was writing, I couldn't separate myself
   from the subject matter," said Wiesel, adding that the eight-page
   account of the train ride from Gleiwitz to Buchenwald could have been
   trimmed down considerably to focus on the essential events. "I just
   assumed everything about my life was so fascinating, people would want
   to read about it. I was so naïve."

   Wiesel went on to criticize Night for lacking the subtlety of his
   later writings, claiming the use of foreshadowing was predictable and
   the description of the harrowing gas chamber selection process felt
   "clichéd...like bad daytime TV melodrama."
     Elie Wiesel Book

   "I simply seized on this 'dehumanizing people through starvation and
   fear' angle and beat it into the ground," said Wiesel, who has learned
   over the years to "show, not tell" in his writing. "Rereading it now
   is absolute hell."

   The author also spoke harshly of Night's publisher, Arthur Wang, who
   encouraged Wiesel to write the book nearly 10 years after he was
   liberated from the concentration camps. He said Wang kept pressuring
   him to publish the story, while ignoring the inherent horror in
   Wiesel's prose.

   "[Wang] didn't even have the decency to tell me my writing was
   completely self- absorbed," Wiesel said. "He should have stopped this
   book before it got out of hand. Somebody, anybody should have
   intervened before it was too late."

   Night was a recent Oprah's Book Club selection, selling more than a
   million copies in only a few months. It returned to the No. 1 spot on
   The New York Times best-seller list, introducing a whole new
   generation of readers to what Wiesel calls "shoddily written, college
   workshop garbage."

   Despite initially agreeing to the Oprah deal, Wiesel has told
   reporters he now regrets not revising the manuscript before its new
   publication.

   "I would have at least liked to put in an interesting dream sequence,
   and extend this part here where my dying father calls out my name with
   his final breath," said Wiesel, holding a heavily annotated paperback
   copy of the memoir. "I can't believe another million people are going
   to read this atrocity. We're just repeating the same terrible mistakes
   of the past."

   Added Wiesel, "God, I wish I were dead."

   Although he told interviewers his embarrassment over the memoir will
   continue to haunt him "during every waking hour," Wiesel hopes that
   those who have already read his book will "just forget the whole thing
   ever happened."

