
   PARAMUS, NJ--With students set to arrive in about three weeks,
   teachers at Washington Street Elementary School were scrambling Monday
   to deal with a new round of budget cuts that slashed funding for the
   pipe cleaners and googly eyes they say are the cornerstone of a
   humanities-based education.
   [4]Enlarge Image Pipe Cleaners 

   Pipe cleaners have been used as a form of artistic expression for
   generations.

   "We are closing the door on our children's creativity," said Melinda
   Jarvis, a first-grade teacher who has used bendy and twisty materials
   in her art lessons for more than 15 years. "Without pipe cleaners,
   these kids will be totally unable to transform everyday objects into
   things with skinny arms and legs. We'll just have a bunch of egg
   cartons sitting around. How is that going to teach them anything about
   the rich artistic traditions that have shaped our civilization for
   millennia?"

   Jarvis, who plans to lead an Indian-style sit-in on the first day of
   school to protest the cuts, is only one of thousands of educators
   across the country to face dramatic drops in their arts budgets over
   the past several years. In Boca Raton, FL, there were reports of up to
   16 kindergartners sharing the same pine cone. More than half of Iowa's
   elementary school students gave their mothers crumpled-up Kleenex
   wrappers taped to tongue depressors as Valentine's Day "roses" last
   year. And a school in Oxnard, CA was reduced to having students draw
   crude eyeballs on scraps of construction paper handed down from
   third-grade classes.
   [5]Enlarge Image Pipe Cleaners 

   A petition decrying the cuts drafted and signed by concerned
   third-graders in Ida Rosen's class in Marquette, MI.

   Bergen County superintendent of schools Jim Eckford said his office
   was forced to make some very difficult decisions, and that Washington
   Street Elementary School students and teachers alike would simply have
   to adjust to the new reality this fall.

   "I would love nothing more than to see every student be able to make
   as many Santa Clauses with big, bushy beards as their hearts desire,"
   Eckford said. "But these are tough times, and the fact of the matter
   is, cotton balls don't grow on trees."

   In light of the budget tightening, Eckford suggested teachers develop
   creative outlets for their children that involve pebbles or
   paper-towel rolls, or somehow combine art class with lunch period.

   Local parents have joined the chorus of opponents, pointing to the
   need to stay competitive with better-funded private schools in which
   students have unlimited access to pipe cleaners and have been known to
   glue googly eyes to other googly eyes.

   "Cutting pipe cleaners and googly eyes is simply going to lead to the
   elimination of more items from school budgets, like Popsicle sticks
   and yarn," said Geraldine Mailer, president of the Washington Street
   Elementary School PTA and a mother of four. "To write out one's name,
   or the name of one's mommy, by pasting dried macaroni to colored paper
   is to illuminate the human soul. We're going to wind up raising a
   generation of mindless conformists."

   Mailer said that the deprivation could lead to future problems,
   including low self-esteem, juvenile delinquency, and a chronic
   inability to create homemade cards and scrapbooks.

   "If we're going to deny our children access to diverse forms of mixed
   media, we may as well just shove a piece of paper in front of them,
   stick a pencil in their hands, and tell them to have at it," Mailer
   said. "But is that what we want for our kids? Is that what we want for
   art?"

