
   CULVER CITY, CA--Writers of a popular prime-time CBS sitcom spent the
   last three weeks making late-stage script adjustments to work its
   female lead's recent abortion into its storyline, sources close to the
   show revealed Monday.
   [4]Enlarge Image Actress 

   Sumner with co-star Carl Hubbard.

   In the upcoming episode of Same Difference, taped late last week and
   scheduled to air in May, star Kirsten Sumner's character, Trish
   O'Connell, the sharp-tongued but beautiful wife of portly Chicago
   bread-truck driver Greg O'Connell, played by Carl Hubbard, will reveal
   to her husband she was pregnant and had an abortion without his
   knowledge. Trish's revelation comprises the secondary, or "B," story
   of the episode, in which Greg eats a meatball sandwich against his
   wife's wishes.

   "It would've been insulting to our viewers if we never addressed the
   fact that Kirsten is so obviously post-abortion," executive producer
   Aaron Karsch said. "We did consider shooting around the abortion and
   using lighting tricks and strategically placed plants to cover up her
   uterus. But everyone would have been able to tell anyhow, so we
   figured we might as well use it to the show's advantage."
   [5]Enlarge Image Producers 

   Producers Larry Krespie and Aaron Karsch dissect the anatomy of a
   sitcom.

   Sumner, who decided to terminate her pregnancy after several weeks of
   emotional deliberation, reportedly informed the show's executive
   producers about it earlier this month. Though the abortion posed a
   significant challenge for Same Difference's 12 writers, who were given
   the task of addressing it in a way that would not disrupt the show's
   lighthearted pace or contradict Sumner's on-screen persona, Karsch
   said such developments "come with the territory."

    "When you're writing a successful sitcom, sometimes the actors'
   personal lives find a way to creep on set and you just have to adapt,"
   Karsch said. "Kirsten's around that age when a lot of actresses start
   thinking about having abortions, so I guess it's not that surprising."

   After viewing the rough edits of the new scenes, Karsch said he
   "couldn't be happier" with the decision to include Sumner's abortion
   in the show, and expects the episode will be Same Difference's most
   popular since "High Definition," a 2002 episode in which Greg bought a
   big-screen TV.

   "It wasn't easy, but in the end, we got some very solid material out
   of it--the plotline stayed true to the O'Connells' relationship while
   still being entertaining," said co- executive producer Larry Krespie,
   adding that, thanks to the show's resourceful writing staff, Sumner's
   evacuated womb may be "the best thing that ever happened to Same
   Difference."

   Despite his initial skepticism about how the new abortion storyline
   would play to the female 36 to 49 demographic, Krespie was ultimately
   won over after viewing the rough edits.

   "Kirsten did some brilliant acting," said Krespie, who called Sumner's
   portrayal of a woman who had recently had an abortion "spot-on." "Our
   show does a lot of quiet, observational humor, and I think anyone
   who's had an abortion would be hard-pressed not to relate to, and get
   a chuckle out of, Trish's situation."

   Continued Krespie: "Kirsten really got into the mind of her character,
   even in the physical-comedy scenes, like when she was trying to avoid
   Greg and get out of the house to get the abortion. And later in the
   packed abortion clinic, when she mistakes the number 81 she received
   from the receptionist for 18, and finds out she has to wait much
   longer for her abortion. But it all leads to a nice, poignant ending
   when both characters realize they should have been honest with each
   other all along--Trish with her pregnancy, and Greg with his
   sandwich."

