
   WASHINGTON, DC--Calling last December's execution of Saddam Hussein
   "anticlimactic," White House officials announced Monday their
   intention to hang the late Iraqi dictator again this year in an
   attempt to garner a more favorable response from the public.
   [4]Enlarge Image U.S. To Re-Hang Saddam Hussein 

   An early sketch of plans for this year's execution event.

   "We're really looking for something that will refocus the American
   people's attention on all the positive aspects of this war," White
   House press secretary Tony Snow said. "We were counting on the death
   of this brutal despot--who, by the way, gassed his own people and was
   just like Hitler--to be a major media event for us. Instead, we wasted
   three or four great news days at a time when we really could have used
   a few high points."

   Most observers considered Hussein's execution, which was carried out
   by Iraq's interim government and broadcast in grainy, amateur footage,
   to be creepy, gruesome, and generally lacking the sense of triumphant
   catharsis authorities had hoped for.

   To remedy the public relations failure, Hussein's body has been dug up
   from its burial place near Tikrit and wired together by U.S. Army
   forensic experts to ensure that it holds its shape during the
   ceremony. The re-hanging, which will be aired on all major networks
   and accompanied by a 30-minute retrospective highlighting the many
   reasons why Hussein was a terrible person deserving of this ignoble
   end, will be "brighter, cheerier, and more upbeat," than the first
   attempt.
     The original hanging

   The original hanging.

   "We're going to have superior production values, inspiring music, and
   live, prime-time coverage straight from Baghdad," said the State
   Department's media coordinator, Ellen Grainer. "[Hussein's body] has
   decomposed so much that his remains will have to be wrapped in canvas
   and covered up, but we plan to display a full-color oversized photo of
   him directly behind the gallows. That should have a real impact on
   viewers. We're pulling out all the stops to make sure we get the
   feel-good media moment everyone's looking for."

   Grainer echoed the sentiments of several Defense Department officials
   who believe the U.S. should never have handed over a high-profile
   hanging to the Iraqi people in the first place. According to Defense
   Secretary Robert Gates, the two biggest miscalculations were allowing
   such a low-quality presentation to be associated with the American
   military, and timing the execution to take place around Christmas.

   "The thinking was that Americans who missed their loved ones overseas
   would appreciate an emotional boost around that time," Gates said.
   "But apparently, people didn't think the holiday season set an
   appropriate mood for a public execution."

   "If we could have hanged Osama bin Laden, that would have been ideal,"
   Gates added. "Obviously, though, you have to catch someone to be able
   to legally murder them, so we're just making the most of what we've
   got."

   It remains to be seen whether public reaction will be more
   enthusiastic this time around.

   "After watching the first hanging, I felt kind of sickened and empty
   inside," Iowa resident Ted Froman, 38, said. "But with all the
   violence that's going on over there at the moment, it would be nice to
   see something done right."

   In the event that the execution fails to create the desired positive
   effect, authorities said they would not rule out hanging Hussein a
   third or even a fourth time, if necessary.

