
   AUGUSTA, GA--World No. 1-ranked golfer Tiger Woods, after appearing to
   struggle through the weekend--playing with uncharacteristic
   inconsistency, bogeying twice in the final rounds, and breaking
   clubs--shocked the crowd at Augusta by stripping off a carefully
   crafted mask and revealing that he had created the character of "Zach
   Johnson," played both Johnson's rounds and his own, and was in fact
   the winner of this year's Masters.
   [4]Enlarge Image Tiger Woods 

   "Did you seriously think I was going to lose this weekend?" Woods
   said, holding his "Johnson" mask aloft just moments after sinking
   "Johnson's" final putt as the gallery, surprised and relieved to have
   witnessed the Tiger Woods triumph they came to see, redoubled their
   cheers. "No way. This tournament was mine from the beginning. My only
   regret was that I was so busy playing 'Johnson's' game and mine
   simultaneously that 'Tiger's' score suffered."

   "But I did it to prove something to myself. They say in golf, the only
   person who can beat a true champion is himself," Woods said, peeling
   back the latex from his arms. "And that's exactly what happened here
   today."

   The revelation is the ultimate twist to a story that began to unfold
   when "Johnson," by all accounts an unknown Iowan, began to pull away
   from the field in the final round. As the world watched what they
   thought was a scrappy underdog with an uncommonly cool head supposedly
   playing the game of his life, "Johnson" shot a three-under 69 in his
   final round and held off a late challenge from an unusually, almost
   suspiciously, harried Woods.

   "As 'Zach,' I had an entirely different swing, which was part of the
   challenge of the whole persona," Woods said. "I also had to putt
   differently in order to make it look authentic, and some shots I'd
   normally hit well had to go into the trees to throw people off. It
   tested the limits of even my considerable talent."

   As tension mounted, the heavily disguised Woods found his attention
   completely occupied with the strain of not only playing "Johnson's"
   game, but maintaining the soft-spoken character of his new persona by
   giving self-effacing interviews laced with Christian rhetoric,
   conferring with the actress hired to pose as his wife Kim, and holding
   the rubber doll that served as his baby.

   "Naturally, in the end, I found my actual game suffered, and I tied
   for second with [Rory] Sabbatini and [Retief] Goosen," Woods said,
   while throwing his costume's amazingly lifelike latex arm-sheaths to
   the crowd. "Put on the Johnson costume, shoot his hole, take off the
   Johnson costume, shoot Tiger's hole. Tough day. I doubt anyone else
   could have done it and scored a combined four-over. I even came in
   second with all the strain, and I'm Tiger Woods."

   "Still... When Johnson bogeyed 17 by missing a three-foot putt, then
   came back to save par on the last?" Woods continued. "Classic Tiger. I
   can't believe people didn't realize that Zach Johnson was in fact me
   right then and there. Who else could it be?"

   "Although I have to say, I almost had me on the last few holes--bad
   driver, but if I'd sunk the birdie putt on 16, I close within a shot
   of myself with two holes left," Woods added. "And trust me--if any man
   alive can make a disguised Tiger Woods wilt under pressure, it's me."

   Woods' announcement sent a wave of combined amazement and relief
   throughout the golf world.

   "On a windy, cold day like this, for Tiger to fade the way he did?
   Unheard of. Practically unthinkable," said ESPN analyst Andy North.
   "And then for a no-name long shot from Iowa to come from literally
   nowhere to beat him and win it all? Unbelievable. Either story would
   have rocked the golf world. Together, they might have shattered it if
   they had come true."

   "Luckily for us all, they didn't," North added. "Tiger's still Tiger,
   even when he's Zach Johnson."

   Many are calling Woods the first golfer ever to finish a major in both
   first and second place, though golf historians have been quick to
   point out the 18-hole playoff in the 1942 Masters in which Ben Hogan
   defeated "Byron Nelson."

