
   HOUSTON--NASA administrator Michael Griffin announced during a press
   conference Tuesday that the space agency is launching an ambitious
   mission to make Houston's Johnson Space Center wireless-Internet
   capable within one decade.
   [4]Enlarge Image Mission Control Center 

   Frustrated Mission Control Center staff experience yet another dial-up
   disconnection while browsing the web Tuesday.

   "We are entering a new era for NASA," Griffin said during a slide show
   for reporters showing conceptual illustrations of a wireless modem
   that would be used in all of the agency's offices and laboratories
   that use personal computers. "We are not content to rest on our
   laurels. It may seem like an impossible task, but if we commit all of
   our focus, technology, and resources, we can get Wi-Fi into NASA's
   offices and research labs within our generation."

   Griffin was confident that NASA's estimated $655 million plan to
   install a wireless broadband router by 2017 could reap huge benefits
   for the entire space agency.

   "In a few short years, all NASA employees will be able to check their
   e-mail throughout the complex, even in the cafeteria," Griffin said.

   According to agency officials, accessing the Internet has been an
   ongoing struggle for NASA. Still relying on a single dial-up modem,
   employees nevertheless continue to get disconnected from the Internet
   whenever the Johnson Space Center receives an incoming call or someone
   picks up the phone to dial out. In 2005, NASA attempted to upgrade
   from dial-up to DSL, but the program was aborted when engineers were
   unable to get the Ethernet hub to function.

   While the building that houses the public affairs office can currently
   pick up a weak Wi-Fi signal from a Starbucks across the street, the
   Johnson Space Center as a whole is far from being the "giant Wi-Fi
   hotspot" Griffin envisions.

   "If NASA is to fulfill its vision of a working environment of today,
   we will need to develop existing technologies to ensure Internet
   connectivity can be sustained without employees becoming entangled in
   cords," Griffin said.
   [5]Enlarge Image Commanders 

   Commanders Scott Dreisen and Alan Wittmer explore a Houston-area Best
   Buy for possible signs of wireless routers in NASA's heroic first
   steps into the Wi-Fi Age.

   If federal funding is approved, NASA will begin its search for
   wireless capability by sending a series of robotic probes into the
   depths of the Johnson Space Center, exploring the surfaces of desks
   and tables to search for the most viable modem base. Once the probes
   have photographed the area, the information they have gathered will be
   transmitted back to Houston's Mission Control Center for analysis.

   Griffin said that the agency has also recruited seven information
   technology specialists from some of the nation's top white-collar
   regional workplaces. The seven mission specialists in the newly dubbed
   "Internet Explorer" program are being rigorously trained to install
   the theoretical wireless devices in an Earth-gravity environment in
   which they could encounter potentially arduous conditions such as poor
   air ventilation and lifeless workscapes.

   Since spring, NASA has also conducted some preliminary, small-scale
   reconnaissance missions to a Houston-area Best Buy, where crews
   conducted research and compared prices. Scientists within the agency
   say early data from the trips is promising, showing a generous return
   policy and an extended warranty plan. In addition, researchers have
   investigated the digital cable setup at veteran space shuttle
   astronaut Ken Bowersox's house.

   NASA has suffered from a public credibility crisis in recent years due
   to perceived incompetence, a failed mission to Mars, the damaged and
   dormant Hubble telescope, and its inability to procure a long enough
   USB cable to reach all the way over to engineer William Chen's
   cubicle. But NASA officials argue that a secure high-speed line could
   prevent disasters such as a 2005 incident in which an employee
   attempting to download the movie trailer for Cheaper by the Dozen 2
   crashed the Mission Control Center mainframe computer for two weeks.

   Griffin may have an uphill battle convincing Congress to fund the
   project. As the NASA administrator himself admitted at the press
   conference, even if a workable wireless router is successfully
   purchased, engineers will need at least an additional two years to
   examine the owner's manual before attempting to install the
   complicated equipment.

   Once the wireless local area network is completed, Griffin said that
   NASA will embark on its next great project: constructing a laptop
   capable of taking advantage of Wi-Fi's high-speed access by 2037.

