
   EVERETT, WA--After re-watching the last six episodes of the show's
   first season Tuesday night, local resident Sam Krewalski, a
   29-year-old data-entry clerk and avid Lost fan, mentioned yet again
   that the diverse cast of characters featured in the hit ABC drama
   "totally reminds [him]" of his circle of eight friends.
   [4]Enlarge Image Area Man 

   Though Krewalski does not have any black friends, he would want them
   to be like Mr. Eko rather than Michael.

   "Dave [Engler] is definitely Jack," said Krewalski, comparing the
   31-year-old line cook whom he has known since college to the selfless
   doctor and leader of the survivors. "Always has a plan. Always making
   the tough decisions. Just last week, none of us could decide where we
   wanted to eat, when Dave all of a sudden steps in and says Outback
   Steakhouse, and boom, it was like the scene where they all follow Jack
   to the caves."

   "And Dave also has this thing where he always has to 'fix things,'"
   Krewalski continued, referring to Jack's main character flaw. "Like
   that time he broke my cupboard door and, even though I told him it was
   fine, he insisted on screwing my cupboard door back on. I was like,
   'Okay, Jack.' He seriously needs to learn to let go sometimes."

   According to Krewalski, his friend Katie Peters is "the Kate of the
   group," not only because both she and the TV character share the same
   first name and are attractive, but also because Katie, like Kate, is
   adventurous.

   "Last month, a bunch of us were going to the batting cages, and she
   was like, 'I'm coming, too,'" Krewalski said. "I had to laugh. Katie,
   always trying to be one of the guys."

   "I guess my other friend Katie, Katie O'Malley, is also a little bit
   like Kate," he added. "But she's also like Sun, too. Yeah, she's Sun."

   Krewalski claims that he himself is a mixture of John Locke and
   Desmond, pointing out that he "truly identifies with" both of their
   struggles, and that he can be designated as two separate characters
   because "no one else [he knows] is like them, so it's okay."
   [5]Enlarge Image Area Man Lost Chart 

Coincidence?

   Just some of the eerie similarities

   "Desmond had to push a button every 108 minutes for three years in
   order to save the world," Krewalski said, noting that he also has a
   beard like Desmond's. "At my job, I sit around, mindlessly entering
   numbers into a computer all day, too. All for the greater good. In
   fact, some mornings on my way to work, I jokingly say to myself, 'Off
   to go push the button.' Or sometimes, 'Off to go save the world.'"

   In addition, Krewalski said he is "pretty much" like John Locke,
   despite never having had his kidney stolen by his con-man father, nor
   having been pushed from a 10-story building, becoming paralyzed from
   the waist down, and suddenly regaining the ability to walk in an
   unexplained miracle.

   "I'm the provider," he said, likening his role among his friends to
   that of the island's hunter and tracker. "Last Super Bowl, I made
   quesadillas for everyone, and it was totally like Locke coming back
   with the boar, me marching in with all that food. My friends didn't
   think I could cook. It was definitely a 'Don't tell me what I can't
   do!' moment."

   "Also, I have a really good sense of direction," Krewalski added. "And
   faith. I have faith like John Locke, too. John Locke is awesome."

   Krewalski explained that some of the correlations between the show's
   characters and his friends were not immediately obvious, and certain
   acquaintances only revealed which characters they truly represented
   through interactions with already classified friends.

   "I struggled to peg [Steve] Wang for the longest time, but when I saw
   how he acted around Katie, or Kate, it suddenly dawned on me: He's
   Sawyer," Krewalski said. "That made me realize how Wang is always
   coming up with these funny nicknames for everyone, like Sawyer does.
   I'm 'Sam-O' and he calls Tom [White] 'Whitey.'"

   "Tom's like Hurley because he's fat," Krewalski added.

   Other designations Krewalski has made in recent months include: Greg
   is Sayid, Froberg is Jin, Pete is Boone, Krewalski himself is also
   Sayid, Joe is Ben, and Joe's dog Rufus is Vincent. He also has a group
   of acquaintances that he has dubbed his "tail section of friends," or
   "Tailies," for short. Among them, Robert is Bernard, Anne is Claire
   and Rose and Ana-Lucia and Libby and Rousseau, and Gabe is Shannon,
   because according to Krewalski, even though they are different
   genders, "they're both annoying." Krewalski also claims his friend
   Chris is "exactly like" Charlie, as both have struggled with a heroin
   addiction.

   Last week, in what Krewalski called "an interesting twist" to his
   circle of friends, Dave invited some of his coworkers from the
   restaurant to come along for drinks with everyone. Krewalski has begun
   to refer to this group of people as "the Others."

   "There was definitely a lot of mystery surrounding them at first,
   because we all went out to their favorite bar, and we were on their
   turf," Krewalski said. "But something tells me they could turn out to
   be good guys."

   "Then again, they might just be assholes," Krewalski added.

