
   PARIS--Vice-President Al Gore felt a deep, all-consuming sense of
   worthlessness Monday, when, after months of careful diplomatic
   networking, he was stood up by French officials who were supposed to
   meet him to discuss vital foreign trade issues.

   [4]Enlarge Image Al Gore Stood Up On Diplomatic Visit 

   Busboys clean up and prepare to close as Vice-President Al Gore waits
   in vain for a delegation of French economic officials.

   "I'm pretty sure the minister's office said two o'clock," the
   vice-president said, speaking from his empty table. "I wrote it down."

   Gore, who was scheduled to meet with the French minister of trade,
   André Picallard, and a delegation of leading French economists at
   Paris' posh Grande Hotel restaurant at 2 p.m., waited alone for more
   than four hours, sources close to the maître d' said.

   Not until restaurant employees began placing chairs on tables and
   vacuuming the famed 250-year-old eatery's fine rugs did Gore finally
   give up, shaking his head in a desultory manner as he exited the
   establishment.

   "They could have at least called," Gore was overheard mumbling as he
   left the restaurant and began the long walk back to Air Force Two in
   the rain, alone.

   A placemat was later discovered where Gore had been sitting, covered
   in "squiggly little doodles" and the words "Everybody Hates Me" in
   tiny, shaking handwriting.

   "One can easily imagine what was going through the vice-president's
   head as, over and over, waiters asked him if he was ready to order,"
   Georgetown University political science professor Walter C. Ayers
   said. "As he pathetically requested basket after basket of bread,
   having his water glass refilled time after time, he surely must have
   been thinking, 'Those French officials don't even want to talk to me.
   Nobody really cares about me at all.'"

   Particularly humiliating was an incident in which a group of foreign
   dignitaries waved from across the room, causing Gore to stand up and
   extend a handshake, only to realize that they were actually waving to
   a group of Algerian dignitaries seated at a table behind him.

   "They probably just got the address mixed up," Gore was overheard
   saying to a busboy. "Paris can be a hard city to find your way around
   in, right?" The busboy did not speak English and was unable to
   respond.

   White House officials were quick to put the incident into perspective.

   "I don't feel that what happened at that restaurant says anything
   about Al Gore's leadership capabilities. Nor does it in any way damage
   his standing as the leading candidate for the presidency in 2000. Al
   Gore is as vital and dynamic a political candidate as ever," said
   Andrew Conner, a White House staffer whose entire job consists of
   telling the press that Gore is a vital and dynamic political
   candidate.

   "Gore is the man to lead America into the 21st... Oh, what's the use?"
   Conner added, before trailing off and shutting the door to his office
   with a labored sigh.

   "It is safe to assume that Vice-President Gore's self-esteem hit a low
   point during those four long, lonely hours, as he sat there with no
   one to talk to, occasionally eating the complimentary crackers, toying
   with the artificial sweetener packets and checking his watch every few
   seconds," Rep. Jonathan Diedricks (R-FL) said. "Why wouldn't he? It's
   only natural to feel an all-consuming sense of one's own worthlessness
   after such a humiliating rejection as this."

   President Clinton personally reassured Gore upon the vice-president's
   return to Washington late Monday. "There's plenty of other diplomatic
   fish in the sea, sport," Clinton told Gore as the two shared a carton
   of ice cream and a good cry.

   White House Chief of Staff Leon Panetta moved quickly to restore
   Gore's confidence as well, telling him that he "has to just get right
   back up in the saddle and give it the old Al Gore try." Panetta also
   set up a hastily arranged summit with a friend of the Zimbabwean
   ambassador's sister.

   Gore, however, declined the offer. "I'm thinking that maybe I want to
   take a little time off from negotiating for a while," he told
   reporters at a press conference Tuesday. "You know, sometimes 'alone'
   is a really good place to be."

   Though the assembled media smiled and nodded sympathetically during
   Gore's remarks, the majority were just trying to save face. "We didn't
   want to hurt his feelings," said NBC Nightly News reporter Cynthia
   Hayworth. "He looked so sad up there behind his little podium--like a
   hound dog left out in the rain, a hound dog nobody loves or wants."

   Gore is spending the next several days at his mother's house, White
   House staffers said.

   The vice-president is also said to be "working on a poem for his
   diary."

   Tipper Gore refused to comment on the incident, saying she had "more
   important things to do than worry about Al's constant little crises."

