
   MALLORCA, SPAIN--In a relaxed group interview given immediately
   following his record-tying third consecutive French Open victory,
   world No. 2-ranked tennis player Rafael Nadal attributed his
   astounding clay-court performance to staying focused, rising to the
   challenge of facing quality opponents such as Carlos Moyá and Roger
   Federer, and most importantly, to living a life revolving completely
   around clay.
   [4]Enlarge Image Rafael Nadal 

   "It is no secret that I perform best upon the traditional clay
   courts," the cheerful, red-smeared Nadal told reporters who visited
   him in his familial homeland in Spain's Balearic Islands. "This is
   partially because the slower surface suits my style, plays to my
   strong forehand, and allows me to best use my energy. And it is
   partially because I have embraced the fundamental, life-giving
   clay--the substance from which God formed all men--and taken it into
   the deepest aspects of my very being."

   "Come with me," Nadal said, extending a red-ochre-caked hand to
   members of the press, gesturing for them to accompany him up the clay
   pathway to his home. "Come into my world of clay."

   Showing off his estate, a sprawling yet modest 19-room cast-clay
   mansion built on 25 acres of hard-packed red clay, the obviously
   house-proud Nadal explained the role of clay in his philosophy,
   training regimen, and daily life, pausing only to point out features
   such as his 1,000-bottle wine cellar, carved from the very living clay
   of the island; the Olympic-sized baked-clay swimming pool, which
   servants were busy filling with fresh, lightly chlorinated clay in
   preparation for his French Open victory party; and of course, the
   three tennis courts along the side of his house, one in red clay, one
   in American-style green clay, and one built with half a court of each
   type of clay.

   "Clay, as everyone knows, punishes the over-precise player and brings
   a player's instinct into play," said Nadal, sprawling into a
   clay-formed chaise lounge and dipping a handful of clay from a nearby
   earthen bowl. "This instinct for how the serve will move, how the
   volley will progress, even how the break point must be played--this
   instinct cannot be taught, only shaped as by the potter's hand. And
   one shapes his instinct by constant communion with that most plastic
   and moldable of earths."

   "I speak, naturally, of clay itself," Nadal added, luxuriating as he
   worked his handful of clay into his face, neck, and scalp. "Yes. Clay.
   Yes."

   Over a dinner consisting of earthy soups, an unnamed but dark and
   hearty roast, and unusually brown bread, Nadal denied any
   dissatisfaction with either his perennial No. 2 ranking or his
   perceived role as a one-trick player.

   "If I am second in the world, it is because so many matches are played
   on the non-traditional and decadent surface of grass," said Nadal, who
   sipped upon a post-prandial cup of hot brandied clay in an effort to
   mask his anger at the mention of what he considers to be a lesser
   surface. "What is grass but a regrettable parasite upon the pure and
   pristine clay? And playing well upon clay, upon the very stuff of
   life, upon the breast of the Earth itself...that is not a trick. That
   is the very deepest alluvial layer of tennis itself."

   Nadal then concluded the dinner by offering his guests homemade
   iced-clay sundaes.

   When informed of his rival's clay-based philosophies, top-ranked men's
   player Roger Federer was nonplussed. "I do not dispute that Rafael is
   extremely difficult to beat on his favored surface," Federer said in a
   telephone interview Wednesday, "but I believe it is purely because it
   suits his personal style of play, not because his attendants encase
   him in a clay sarcophagus every night. We may be rivals, but I worry
   about him, especially since he was treated twice last winter in
   Barcelona for clay inhalation."

   "Still, it is impossible to overemphasize the importance of mental
   preparation," Federer added. "Which is why my house is a single
   unfurnished 78-by-27-foot room bisected by a three-foot net. Perhaps I
   shall consider installing clay floors before next year's French open."

