
   WASHINGTON--In an unexpected reversal that environmentalists and
   scientists worldwide are calling groundbreaking, President George W.
   Bush, for the first time in his political career, openly admitted to
   the existence of carbon dioxide following the release of the new U.N.
   Global Environment Outlook this October.
   [4]Enlarge Image Bush Acknowledges 

   The announcement has wide-ranging implications for exhalation, club
   soda, and photosynthesis.

   "Carbon dioxide, a molecule which contains one atom of carbon bonded
   with two atoms of oxygen, is a naturally occurring colorless gas
   exhaled by humans and metabolized, in turn, by plants," Bush told a
   stunned White House press corps. "As a leading industrialized nation,
   we can no longer afford to ignore the growing consensus of so many
   experts whose job it is to study our atmosphere. Carbon dioxide is
   real."

   Because carbon dioxide, which was first described by 17th-century
   Flemish physician Jan Baptista van Helmont as a gas he referred to as
   "spiritus silvestre," has long been denied by the Bush administration,
   the president's speech was widely hailed as a victory for advocates of
   empirically established scientific fact.

   "This has been a major step forward for national basic-chemistry
   policy," said longtime CO2 proponent and eighth-grade science teacher
   Linda Mattson. "By taking this brave stance, Bush has opened the door
   for the eventual acknowledgment that other molecular compounds, such
   as H20, for example, may in fact exist as well."

   Many of those whom Bush has long considered to be his most loyal
   followers, however, have expressed disappointment with the
   development.

   "There is nothing about any 'carbon dioxide' in the Bible," said Rev.
   Luke Hatfield of Christchurch Ministries in Topeka, KS. "What's next?
   Claims that so-called 'fossil' fuels come from mythical creatures like
   dinosaurs? This has been a sad step backward for our nation."

   A White House spokesman was careful to categorize the announcement as
   "cautious," and reiterated that the president is still not ready to
   take any position on the existence of polar ice caps, ozone, or a
   controversial idea held by many scientists and often referred to as
   "weather."

