
   MILL RUN, PA--In a town where residents are still in shock over last
   Sunday's brutal mass slaying, in which a mentally disturbed man shot
   17 men, women, and children in Main Street's St. John The Baptist
   Church before turning his shotgun on himself, last night's County
   League baseball game against longtime rival Uniontown was completely
   ineffective in mending the hurt and despair felt by those in the area.
   [4]Enlarge Image Sports Unable 

   According to those in attendance, even after the supposed natural
   healing powers of pitches, hits, stolen bases, ground balls, and
   bunts, the shooting--the first in Mill Run in over 10 years and easily
   the most deadly criminal incident in Mill Run's history-- remained
   fresh and raw in the town's collective consciousness. Mill Run lost
   the game 7-4, though many at the game say they were still in shock
   over the shooting and were therefore not aware of the final score.

   "I still miss my brother and my sister-in-law," still-shaken hardware
   store owner John Geary said after the ultimately non-therapeutic
   sporting event. "God, I miss them so much. Even that double by Josh
   [Thurman] in the fifth [inning] really didn't make me feel any better
   about some madman shooting them. In fact, I felt worse, because for
   the brief second I cheered, I almost forgot that I'll never see Randy
   and Melissa again, that Father Corrigan isn't supposed to ever regain
   consciousness, and that some of the children in this community are now
   parentless."

   "Cheering for a stupid double in a stupid baseball game after
   everything that happened," Geary added. "What kind of idiot am I? Why
   did they even play this game?"

   Mill Run mayor Frank Shultz said the game was not canceled due to his
   mistaken belief  in the "healing power of sports" to "make everything
   better."
     Sports Unable Jump

   "Obviously, I couldn't have been more wrong," Shultz, who doesn't plan
   on attending another sporting event for a long time, told reporters
   after the game. "And I officially apologize to all the citizens, who
   need professional help, spiritual guidance, and each other's love and
   company far more than they needed a stupid baseball game."

   "Everyone wants everything to go back to the way it was, but seeing as
   how a man killed 17 people in our church and then shot himself, I
   think I would much rather admit that things are completely abnormal at
   the moment than pretend that I care if we make the playoffs," said
   resident Diane Ward, 47, who said her shock and grief were in no way
   blunted by a crisply executed double play in the seventh inning.

   Locals reportedly watched in shocked silence throughout the entire
   game, rarely reacting to the play on the field, and never with much
   enthusiasm. No one interviewed afterwards believed that the sight of
   the team taking the field was symbolic of the town's will to "continue
   on," took any solace whatsoever in the collective singing of the
   national anthem, or thought the moment of silence before the game's
   first pitch was "moving," considering that it occurred at the trivial
   and relatively unimportant site of Town Baseball Field #5 and not a
   more dignified location.

   In fact, attendees said, at no point did anyone suffering from the
   pain and despair created by the massive murder-suicide, a tragedy that
   will forever alter this town's way of life, feel any less miserable
   because of the nine-inning baseball game.

   "It's just baseball," said Tracey Wallace, 11, who lost both parents
   and her older brother in the slaying and reportedly had to be sedated
   to stop her convulsive sobbing after she was asked if she would like
   to throw out a "healing" first pitch. "Not Daddy alive again. Not
   Mommy back. Just baseball."

   The baseball game's inability to heal the town came as a shock to many
   in the sports and sports-entertainment media. According to every
   single ESPN correspondent, Sports Illustrated editor, and every
   nationally known sports columnist, over the last six years the
   spectacle of sports has invariably allowed individuals, communities,
   and entire nations to almost instantly heal, and in some cases,
   apparently skip altogether the normal years-long grieving process that
   accompanies a monumental tragedy.

   "I don't know what's wrong with these people," Daily News columnist
   Mike Lupica said on Sunday's edition of ESPN's The Sports Reporters.
   "Maybe they just didn't understand what was supposed to happen. First,
   the group experience of watching the game was supposed to show the
   town how strong they were/are as a community. Second, with that
   newfound strength, it was their role to realize they could overcome
   any type of tragedy as long as they have one another. Third, while the
   game was going on, if they observed anything positive from the home
   team--a clutch hit, a home run, or a well-fielded ground ball--it was
   the duty of those in attendance to have the epiphany that their
   deceased loved ones were watching from above, cheering them on from
   heaven, and that everyone on Earth could and should now move on."

   "And most of all, those in attendance would leave the game completely
   healed so that everyone could see how beautiful it was that, with the
   aid of the eternal magic of baseball, this town was capable of
   healing," Lupica added. "Mill Run screwed that one up. I think these
   people are letting this whole church murder thing get in the way of
   what's really important."

   Mill Run resident Tommy Shroyer, who was in the church at the time of
   the shooting, disagreed with Lupica, saying, "Believe me, I didn't
   feel that anybody was watching us from above. I felt really sad, like
   I was doing something stupid, because if they were watching they were
   probably wondering what the fuck we were doing at a baseball game."

   According to Denver Post sports columnist Woody Paige, the area
   doesn't need time to reflect upon the tragedy.

   "These sad sacks simply need more sports," Paige wrote in a piece that
   received over 500 positive e-mails from fans nationwide in less then
   two hours. "I recommend the town's mayor get his town healed by adding
   20 more County League baseball games, moving up the start date of the
   high-school football season, and bringing players from the Pittsburgh
   Steelers into the school gymnasium to play a fun and heartwarming game
   of mandatory celebrity donkey basketball. Sports is going to heal
   these people whether they want it to or not."

