
   HARRISONBURG, VA--Rescue workers and concerned neighbors gathered
   Saturday outside the Conklin residence on Waterson Avenue where
   authorities say local child David Conklin remains trapped in a
   dangerously lame family, a harrowing ordeal now entering its 13th
   tense year.
   [4]Enlarge Image Rescue workers attempt to rush life-saving games and
   snacks to the boy. 

   Rescue workers attempt to rush life-saving games and snacks to the
   boy.

   When police arrived on the scene Saturday morning, David--who recently
   entered junior high and is clearly not a baby anymore--was found
   pinned under two inflexible parents who rendered him completely
   immobile. Officers are working around the clock to free the boy and
   give him a second chance at a social life.

   "At this time we're doing everything we can to make [David] as
   comfortable as possible," said Lt. William Barnes of the Harrisonburg
   Fire Department, who coordinated efforts to provide the 12-year-old
   with a warm North Face jacket to replace the retarded hand- me-down
   parka that once belonged to his older brother, Stephen. "But
   realistically, this situation could go on for at least another six
   years. That is, God forbid, if he doesn't die of boredom first."
     Conklin

   Conklin

   Authorities are still unsure how the seventh grader became trapped in
   such a boring family, though David's 15-year-old sister, Laura, put
   forth several theories, including speculation that David was an
   accident or, alternatively, was adopted from gypsies.

   With rescue efforts continuing throughout the afternoon, early hopes
   that David would escape through a small hole of free time between
   dinner and lights-out were quickly dashed when he became entangled in
   a family game night and was nearly crushed by the tedium of playing
   hand after tortuous hand of UNO.

   "We're trying to get a Nintendo Wii in there to relieve some of the
   pressure," Barnes said. "David is in a very tight spot. Even if we get
   him the game console, the restrictions he's currently under may
   prevent him from using it."

   "Our biggest fear right now is the possibility that David is being
   smothered," Barnes continued.

   A second chance for relief came at 8:35 p.m., when David's dogged
   efforts to free himself forced his parents to budge slightly and
   consider allowing their son to watch television at friend Philip
   Kirchart's house. However, David's potential escape route was almost
   instantly blocked by a massive pile of homework.
   [5]Enlarge Image Desperate Situation 

   "This is a huge setback in freeing David," said Barnes, who expressed
   frustration with the deteriorating situation. "If he doesn't get that
   diorama for Mrs. Engles' class off his back before nightfall, I'm
   afraid we'll just have to wait until morning."

   Despite all attempts by his rescuers, David's situation has grown
   increasingly grim. At 4:16 p.m., the boy nearly died of embarrassment
   after his mother asked him if there were any cute girls in his class,
   and again less than two hours later at dinner, when she openly
   discussed his need for new underwear.

   Additionally, medical experts said that David's preexisting condition,
   known as smartmouth, could be severely exacerbated by the dumb, unfair
   family environment he has been subjected to.

   "This becomes an even more serious situation for someone like David,"
   said Louis Vianna, a paramedic on the scene. "A diagnosed wiseacre in
   a stifling environment like that could suffer a full-scale grounding
   at any moment, which would cut David off from vital weekend plans."

   David's agonizing experience has elicited an outpouring of support
   from the community. A local radio station recently held a fundraiser
   to purchase David the desperately needed dirt bike that the
   fun-deprived boy has repeatedly begged for throughout the ordeal, and
   people from around the country have sent letters to David, urging him
   to hang on until he can get his driver's license.

   "No child should have to go through something like this," said Carla
   Berman, one of the dozens of anxious citizens keeping vigil outside
   the Conklin house. "That poor, brave kid. It's not like he asked to be
   born into this."

