
   WASHINGTON--Barely two months after U.N. inspectors in Iran failed to
   find evidence of an active nuclear weapons program, the Department of
   Homeland Security uncovered new information Monday proving the Middle
   Eastern nation has obtained literally trillions of atoms--the same
   particles sometimes used to make atomic bombs--for unknown purposes.
   [4]Enlarge Image Condoleezza Rice 

   Condoleezza Rice displays for reporters one of the many varieties of
   atoms Iran is believed to already possess.

   "We have no doubt that Iran now possesses an alarming number of atoms
   within its borders, despite countless warnings from the international
   community," Secretary of Homeland Security Michael Chertoff said at a
   press conference Monday afternoon, as he pointed to a satellite image
   marked with dozens of locations where his office claims the
   unauthorized atoms are being held. "The Iranians maintain the atoms
   are only being used to form the building blocks of all existence, but
   we cannot afford to take that risk."

   The atoms, which DHS officials believe to be "the smallest indivisible
   units of any element," were first discovered in aerial photographs
   taken of a laboratory in central Isfahan. When the photographs were
   enlarged several hundred thousand times, additional clusters of
   atoms--known in intelligence circles as "matter"--were spotted in
   large cargo trucks parked nearby the facility, in storage units on the
   grounds, and in the pockets, shoes, clothing, hair, and skin of
   several nuclear physicists in the parking lot.

   More alarming, officials said, is the "very likely" possibility that
   there are more atoms inside the laboratory.

   "The threat of atoms in Iran is real," said Chertoff, showing
   reporters an empty vial to illustrate his point. "Even as we speak,
   Iranians are turning millions of carbon atoms into a powerful energy
   source they can use to strengthen their armies, pilots, president, and
   someday perhaps, a team of nuclear physicists."
     Condoleezza Rice

   'We could get into a situation where Iran has so many atoms that its
   increased atomic weight allows it to bully its neighbors.'

   Secretary of State Condoleezza Rice

   Earlier this month, Secretary of State Condoleezza Rice made a visit
   to the region, where she reportedly observed atoms being smuggled
   across the border from neighboring countries Iraq and Afghanistan, as
   well as daily shipments of atoms from as far away as Russia, China,
   and the troposphere. Secretary Rice also witnessed atoms being
   strategically used to deliver televised press conferences regarding
   the nonproliferation of Iranian atoms.

   "Security checkpoints have been unable to stop the flow of atoms into
   Iran," Rice said. "Even with the best equipment available, it is
   nearly impossible to distinguish dangerous atoms that could be used in
   fission for the purposes of massive destruction from the kind of atoms
   that are functioning primarily as mechanical pencils."

   Added Rice: "We cannot afford to let these atoms fall into, or be a
   part of, the wrong hands."

   Vice President Dick Cheney and his staff were briefed on the atomic
   situation in Iran Tuesday with the aid of colorful interlocking
   plastic models and a short film.

   "The United States will not stand idly by while Iran gains the
   protons, neutrons, and whatever else they need to threaten the free
   world," Cheney said at a press conference that afternoon. "Iran has
   demonstrated time and time again its ability to combine atoms of
   hydrogen and oxygen right out in the open, and we cannot allow that to
   go on any longer."

   Iranian officials claim the atoms are being used only for peaceful,
   life-sustaining purposes, and that it is physically impossible for
   Iran or any government to create or destroy matter in order to comply
   with U.S. regulations.

   Next month, U.N. inspectors will visit Iran to investigate and catalog
   all of the nation's current atomic holdings in order to determine if
   the country may be stockpiling dangerous atoms in unregistered
   laboratories, underground facilities, above-ground facilities, the
   citizenry, air, water, soil, grass, shoes, picnic lunches, pets, flaky
   pastries, or the numerous nuclear warheads the country has recently
   featured in parades.

