
   PHOENIX--Years of controversy were finally settled Monday after DNA
   tests conclusively proved that Duane Panovich, an attraction at the
   Phoenix Zoo for the past 11 years, was indeed a human being, and not a
   reticulated giraffe from southwestern Kenya.
   [4]Enlarge Image DNA Evidence Frees Man From Zoo 

   Panovich's former herd-mates enjoy some alfalfa.

   "This is truly a day of jubilation and vindication," said Panovich's
   attorney, Frank Hablis, who successfully argued in a federal court in
   June that the zoo should permit a DNA test to determine whether
   Panovich was genetically closer to a Homo sapiens or a Giraffa
   camelopardalis. "We're deeply grateful that science has advanced
   enough over the years to finally uncover the truth and clear his name
   of the allegations of giraffehood that have been such a burden to him
   and his family."

   Shortly after the findings were revealed, Phoenix Zoo staff
   tranquilized, crated, and transported Panovich by helicopter to his
   Mesa, AZ home, where he was released into his front yard and
   reintroduced to his mate and two young.

   "It's good to finally be home, but more than anything I'm looking
   forward to wearing clothes again," a still-groggy Panovich told
   reporters as an oxpecker bird sat on his shoulder and fed on ticks.

   Panovich, a 42-year-old electrical engineer who stands approximately
   5-feet-11-inches tall, was known during his years at the zoo as
   Wekesa, the Swahili word for "shimmering lily."
   [5]Enlarge Image DNA Evidence Jump 

   As Wekesa, Panovich was among the Phoenix Zoo's most beloved
   attractions. His image was reproduced on hot-selling T-shirts and
   coffee mugs, and he even inspired a Wekesa beanbag stuffed animal.

   Though the zoo eventually bowed to demands from human-rights activists
   to return Panovich to his natural habitat, resentment lingers over his
   release.

   "Wekesa will be back, mark my words," said Reggie Martin, the
   attendant who looked after Panovich for more than a decade. "He'll
   break loose and be eating out of someone's flower box when we pick him
   up again."

   In July 1996, Panovich and his wife Claire were visiting the zoo with
   their then- preschool-age children when several zoo employees believed
   they had spotted a loose giraffe wandering near the baboon exhibit.
   Quickly cordoning off the area, they lassoed Panovich, tranquilized
   him, and placed him in the giraffe pen. Although it was discovered a
   few days later that the zoo had one more giraffe than usual, no owner
   stepped forward to claim Panovich, and a decision was made to keep
   him.
     Duane Panovich

   Duane Panovich

   However, zoo officials began to sense trouble with their new giraffe a
   year later when they attempted to breed him with several of the zoo's
   female giraffes. Panovich sired no calves and showed virtually no
   interest in the opposite sex.

   "That was a big disappointment," Martin said. "He had the ability to
   rut year-round, which is very unique for a giraffe. But when we'd
   spray him with female giraffe urine so he'd become aroused by the
   pheromones, he'd try to kick me with his hooves."

   Although zoo captivity offered him such comforts as free veterinary
   care, a fully heated winter enclosure, and fresh acacia leaves
   imported at considerable expense, Panovich could only think of
   freedom.

   "I so wanted to escape," said Panovich as he fought back tears. "But I
   was worried I'd fall and break my leg trying to jump the concrete
   moat, and then they would be forced to put me down."

   He added that the hardest part of his long ordeal was not being around
   to see his children grow up, except for rare occasions when they came
   to visit with their classes on field trips.

   "Wekesa often told me that he didn't belong in here," Martin said.
   "But everybody says that."

   Through the years, Claire Panovich repeatedly petitioned the zoo to
   release her husband, arguing that his markings, lack of horns, and
   bipedal gait were not consistent with that of a giraffe. She was
   forcibly removed by zoo security on several occasions, most notably in
   2002 for throwing a box of his favorite Hostess snack cakes into his
   pen.

   In a statement following Panovich's release, the zoo said it will
   appeal the court's decision regarding its former giraffe. In spite of
   this, Panovich's story has spurred new interest in the case of
   Ernesto, a scarlet ibis that claims to be a contractor hired to
   remodel the aviary at the Houston Zoo.

