
   NEW YORK--Troy Bartell, 22, former editor-in-chief of Boston
   University's student newspaper The Daily Free Press, said Monday that
   his once-prestigious paper is in "free-fall," and is now printing only
   "ridiculous, brutally incompetent shit."

   "This is lousy, lousy journalism," said Bartell, who still scours the
   paper's online edition for typos despite graduating in May 2006. "The
   way they covered the School of Management's Casino Night this year was
   a slap in the face. Complete and utter fluff. Don't tell me what the
   people were wearing, damn it--tell me who won the raffle at the end of
   the night, and what the prizes were."
   [4]Enlarge Image Former Editor 

   Bartell reads some bullshit about the new DVD players in the College
   of Communication.

   "You can tell that the new people onboard just don't give a shit, and
   believe me, that sort of thing starts at the top," Bartell continued.

   Bartell, a journalism major who was promoted to editor-in-chief  in
   January 2005 after one year as Campus Affairs editor, now works as a
   part-time receptionist for a Manhattan public-relations firm. Bartell
   had a distinguished career at the Free Press, breaking the news of the
   appointment of a new English Department chairman in 2004, and writing
   a three-part series on the revamped trash-can design in the student
   union.

   Believing that his tenure "set a strong, rigorous example for quality
   news writing," Bartell, who often travels back to Boston to attend
   college parties thrown by members of his old newspaper, is saddened
   that none of the staff has followed his example. Everything in the
   paper, he claims, from the coverage of the school's annual Activities
   Expo to the campus radio station-sponsored date auction, has been
   "complete bullshit."

    "Without fail, every time I look at the Free Press, I just cringe
   with embarrassment," Bartell said. "Their reporting is so lax, they
   might as well print propaganda straight from the BU president's
   office. Oh Christ, don't give them any ideas, Bartell."

   Bartell was particularly critical of the coverage of the School of
   Engineering's "Welcome Back" Barbecue in September, saying that none
   of the hard-hitting questions were asked, such as whether vegetarian
   alternatives were available.

   Bartell's fears of a decline in journalistic integrity were further
   augmented by a profile of the new dining-services director, which
   failed to include information about the recent increase in meal-plan
   fees and the new two-pieces-of-fruit-per-student policy.

   "[New Editor-In-Chief] Casey [Aclin] has been a real disappointment,"
   Bartell said. "In a story last Monday, instead of saying 'Dean of
   Students Charles Baker,' it just said 'Dean Baker.' That's a blatant
   disregard of Free Press style rules that never would have flown on my
   watch."

   "Never," he continued.

   But the lowest point, Bartell said, came in December during the
   Student Union Assembly elections.

    "I still have a lot of sources at the school--a lot," Bartell said.
   "From Day One of that fraudulent campaign, more than half of the
   candidates had been illegally leafletting the student union, which
   could result in fines. And what did my paper do with that bombshell?
   One graph in one story, no more. Talk about burying the lede. Where's
   the drive, the curiosity here?"

   The former editor-in-chief has repeatedly volunteered to return to the
   Free Press offices and educate the staff on proper news-writing and
   copyediting techniques, but no one has yet taken him up on his offers.

   Bartell said he's concerned for the future of the publication that he
   described as "a labor of love that sustained me through my college
   years."

   "At this rate, I wouldn't be surprised if the entire student body
   began ignoring the news content all together, and only picked up the
   Free Press to do the crossword puzzle," Bartell said.

