
   BALTIMORE--Police officers investigating complaints of a strange smell
   coming from an abandoned lot in the Curtis Bay neighborhood of
   Baltimore early Monday morning were shocked to stumble on the
   partially decomposed bodies of two unidentified children lying right
   next to an arrowhead that could be hundreds or perhaps even thousands
   of years old.
   [4]Enlarge Image Crime Scene 

   Baltimore Police Department lab technicians were shocked by the
   relatively good condition of the arrowhead.

   "At this time, we are using all available resources to determine just
   what occurred here," Sgt. Richard Palmer of the Baltimore Police
   Department said. "The best scenario we can imagine right now is that
   there was some kind of awesome Indian battle--maybe even an all-out
   war."

   "Of course, we'd love to find conclusive evidence that this thing
   belonged to Chief  Sitting Bull himself," Palmer added. "Right now,
   however, we just can't say for sure."

   While police say they remain baffled by the events that unfolded, they
   have been able to determine that the bodies are those of two young
   girls, believed to be between the ages of 8 and 10, both of whom
   suffered an apparently violent death. Their bodies showed signs of
   blunt force trauma to the head, as well as several postmortem stab
   wounds, although no indications of sexual abuse were present. A steel
   pipe bearing human blood and tissue matter was found at the scene but
   did not appear to be related to the arrowhead.

   "We just couldn't believe what we were seeing," said Lt. Derek
   LaScolla, the lead detective on the case. "As a police officer, you
   like to think you're prepared for anything, but an arrowhead all the
   way out here is an extremely rare find. I would have assumed they'd
   all been dug up during construction by now."

   LaScolla said the discovery was made at approximately 4 a.m., at which
   point police cordoned off a quarter-mile area surrounding the
   arrowhead and began conducting an extensive search for additional
   clues, such as some pottery or beads. The girls' dental records could
   not be checked because the teeth had all been removed, and the bodies
   do not appear to match any recent missing persons reports or any
   artists' depictions of what the Indians who once lived in the
   Baltimore area might have looked like.

   Unfortunately, no woolly mammoth hairs were found on the arrowhead.

   "It's difficult to imagine anything more tragic than this," Sgt.
   Palmer said. "Brave warriors used to walk on this very ground, and
   this [arrowhead] is all that remains of their legacy. It really puts
   everything into perspective."

   Initial forensics reports indicated that, because plants had not grown
   over the corpses completely, they had likely not been in that location
   for more than three months, and after years of exposure to the
   elements, the arrowhead's point was still quite sharp.

   "We're conducting an extensive study on the numerous gouge marks,"
   forensic investigator Marcelline Woodward said. "That's how they
   sharpened them. It's white flint, characteristic of the Delaware
   tribe, or maybe the Conoy. We'll put everything on hold at the lab
   until we can solve this mystery."

   Police continued to search the area through the night, but no
   additional bodies or Indian artifacts were found. Though authorities
   are hesitant to make any statements about the killer, they say that
   the typical profile is generally a male between the ages of 17 and 40,
   which was most likely the age of the hunter who lost his arrowhead in
   the first place.

   "It would be irresponsible to say anything definitive until we get the
   carbon dating results," said Woodward, sealing the arrowhead in a
   plastic baggie marked "Don't Touch!!!". "But if I had to guess, I'd
   say this arrowhead's like 500 years old. Imagine the journey this must
   have taken."

   The Baltimore police are urging citizens to come forward if they have
   noticed any suspicious activity in the neighborhood, if they might be
   able to identify the girls, or if they know anything about arrowheads.

