
   ARLINGTON, VA--An alarming new study published in the International
   Journal of Sexual Health reveals that casual sex, the practice of
   engaging in frequent, spontaneous sexual encounters with new and
   exciting partners, may only provide unimaginable pleasure and
   heart-pounding exhilaration for, at most, 25 to 30 years.

   "People who choose to participate in random, no-strings-attached
   lovemaking sessions with sexually adventurous strangers should be
   advised that this type of behavior is only incredibly liberating for
   the first quarter-century or so," said Dr. Loren Sullivan of Yale
   University, who coauthored the study on the long-term side effects of
   living out one's wildest fantasies on a semi-weekly basis. "Though
   sometimes it can be longer."
   [4]Enlarge Image Study Casual 

   This couple may be having fun now, but there could be cause for regret
   a quarter-lifetime later, researchers say.

   The study observed 100 sexually active volunteers who were not tied
   down by dull, passionless relationships and were therefore able to
   have sex with whomever they wanted, whenever they wanted. A control
   group of individuals who were married or had otherwise allowed their
   erogenous zones to fall into complete and utter numbness was also
   monitored for comparison.

   Researchers found that those who regularly achieved mind-blowing
   orgasms without the expectation of commitment often experienced mild
   feelings of loneliness and a passing regret after as little as three
   decades of pure physical bliss free of emotional complication.

   "There's a troubling number of adults who spend their prime sexual
   years in complete coital abandon, then have nothing to show for it but
   dozens upon dozens of highly detailed erotic memories," Sullivan said.
   "They must be so empty inside, one would think."

   Other common, albeit latent, secondary effects noted in the study
   include mild disappointment and mid-afternoon crankiness, as well as a
   lingering need for additional casual sex. Researchers could not
   conclusively establish a link between anonymous, passionate trysts in
   nightclub bathrooms and these results, however, as a large portion of
   the polling group was found to be asymptomatic.

   One participant, California native Greg Pertzborn, told researchers he
   sometimes wonders if the 30 years he spent beneath a different
   gorgeous woman every night were worth the periodic flickers of
   gloominess he began experiencing at the age of 59.
   [5]Enlarge Image Study Casual Jump 

   "When I think back on the countless times I've had raw, almost bestial
   sex, indoors or outdoors, with one, sometimes two Asian women whose
   parents I'll never have to meet, I occasionally get a little down,"
   Pertzborn said. "God, what if I wasted my life having guilt-free,
   uninhibited, sensually explosive sex with anyone I wanted?"

   Sullivan and his team plan to continue the study, saying they expect
   to find that the unattached, sexually satisfied persons between the
   ages of 20 and 30 whom they have been monitoring will feel compelled
   to settle down with a single partner and begin discussing joint
   checking accounts "any day now."

   "Tragically, it's quite possible that many of these singles may never
   realize how miserable a lifetime of phenomenal, kinky sex can make
   them," said Sullivan, adding that recent evidence suggests such a
   healthy, rational realization could be further hindered by the
   experience of spontaneous oral sex behind the bushes at poolside
   cocktail parties.

   Although the study has not yet caused any perceptible reduction in the
   popularity of having casual sex, proponents of the report, like
   husband and father-of-four Howard Kehoe, say it provides proof that
   promiscuity is not "the endless carnal thrill-ride" it is often made
   out to be.

   "I am so thankful that I never acted on my natural impulses and
   engaged in a sweaty, toe-curling, life-affirming romp with that
   knockout I saw in the park last week," Kehoe said. "I may die having
   only caressed the naked, goose-pimpled flesh of two women on the
   entire planet, including my wife, but at least I know I'll never have
   to endure a burst of fleeting regret long after I've retired."

   "That's one sensation I never want to experience," Kehoe added.

