
   LOS ANGELES--Following his critically acclaimed performance in the
   post-Sept. 11 drama Reign Over Me, a "spellbinding" interview on The
   Colbert Report, and a graceful supporting role in a recent "Make Your
   Own Super Bowl Commercial" ad campaign, actor's actor and voice of his
   generation Don Cheadle captivated patrons of Ollie's Coffee Shop in
   downtown L.A. Monday with his order of a grande half-caff Americano
   and banana- walnut muffin.
     Don Cheadle

   "In a word? Breathtaking," said student Jonathan Stern, who has called
   the three-and-a-half-minute transaction "the Million Dollar Baby" of
   coffee shop purchases. "Cheadle managed to deliver the kind of raw,
   seething emotion necessary to capture the urgency of his craving for
   caffeine."

   "I felt like I was there, experiencing it right alongside him, instead
   of sitting several feet away near the window," Stern added.

   Cheadle, best known for his work in Hotel Rwanda, has received endless
   praise and even an Oscar nomination for his ability to deliver deeply
   resonant performances in dramatic films about African genocides and
   strained race relations, as well as in offbeat comedies and A-list
   heist films.

   "God, I keep thinking about the way he paused to check the specials
   board," said regular Ollie's customer and cosmetologist Joyce Ruiz.
   "Everything was in that pause. A lesser actor could easily have
   oversold the desire for a cranberry bran muffin, but Cheadle remained
   deliberate and restrained."
   [4]Enlarge Image Don Cheadle Cafe 

   "I can't imagine even Terrence Howard or Philip Seymour Hoffman
   pulling that off with such aplomb," Ruiz continued.

   Living up to his reputation as a "dogged perfectionist," Cheadle was
   spotted researching the highly anticipated purchase at several
   different Los Angeles-area coffee shops in recent months. Though the
   actor spent years testing various wardrobe options and beverage
   choices, the 10-odd customers who were lucky enough to witness the
   final product agreed that his hard work paid off.

   "What I saw today was gold-standard Cheadle," said general contractor
   Dave Hoyt, who was in line during the actor's purchase. "I'd venture
   to say it was the most amazing performance I've seen from him since I
   drove past a bus that had his Gap ad on the side. I sobbed in my car
   for a long time that day, thinking about art's capacity to transcend
   human tragedy."
     The Transaction

   Customers also heaped praise on the unorthodox, and at times
   surprising, decisions that separated Cheadle's purchase from so many
   others.

   "He made some gutsy choices that would have fallen flat in less
   talented hands," said real estate agent Beverly Kinney of a
   controversial moment during the transaction when Cheadle dropped some
   of his change onto the floor after paying.  "But under Cheadle's
   command, they served to seamlessly create a convincing dimension of
   vulnerability and humanity."

   Employees at the coffee shop noted that barista Monica Naylor turned
   in her career-best performance during the transaction, reinforcing
   Cheadle's reputation as a customer who pushes those he purchases
   things from to the zenith of their abilities.

   "Cheadle put Monica at ease," coworker Kyle Brent said. "He never
   overshadowed or downplayed the importance of her part in the purchase,
   and she definitely benefited from his experience as a customer. He's
   just one of those people who makes everyone around him better."

   Ollie's patron Sarah Shoemaker, 27, added that the transaction was
   "the most powerful exchange of goods and services of the year."

   Cheadle's performance, however, was not without its critics.

   "This is the second time in as many days that he's been to this café,"
   Shoemaker said. "He should mix it up a bit. A bail bonds office? An
   ice-cream shop? An ATM? He's such a phenomenal talent that it'd be a
   shame to see him get into a rut and fall short of his potential."

