
   STOCKHOLM--2007 was an extraordinary year for former vice president Al
   Gore, who received the highest honors in both film and humanitarianism
   for his tireless efforts in creating a visually pleasing, hour-long
   slide-show presentation using the popular computer program Keynote.
   [4]Enlarge Image Gore Wins 

   Gore displays his vast knowledge of the program's "custom shape" tool.

   The slide show, which features approximately 80 full-color pictures of
   landforms and people, as well as a vast array of detailed line and bar
   graphs, proved beyond a shadow of a doubt that a successful visual
   presentation must utilize both an application's audio and graphic
   capabilities. Furthermore, Gore effectively silenced many of his
   critics by incorporating short videos.

   "The Nobel Committee was deeply moved by Mr. Gore's passion for making
   a clear, concise, easy-to-watch slide show," Professor Geir Lundestad,
   director of the Nobel Institute, told reporters in late October. "[The
   slide show] truly displayed how well-placed transitions--be they
   dissolves, wipes, or splits--can really tie a presentation together."

   Added Lundestad: "Also, the slides with multi-image animation were
   cool."

   In February, Gore's montage of satellite images and title slides was
   awarded an Oscar by the Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences
   and was hailed for presenting a "truly global message" with a clear
   beginning, middle, and end.

   "I was stunned," said Phoenix resident Amy Swinton, 23, who saw the
   slide show twice in theaters. "It turns out that you don't always need
   flashy fonts or background colors to make a great multimedia
   presentation. Simple white text on an all black background can be very
   effective."

   Swinton later called the slide show extremely informative, saying that
   over the course of two hours she was completely convinced of the
   reality of Keynote's "bounce" slide-transition option.

   "I think these awards will help give even more weight to Mr. Gore's
   ultimate message," New York Times columnist Paul Krugman wrote. "In
   our changing world, it is absolutely essential that all of us do our
   part to stay informed about the various eye-catching possibilities of
   today's slide-show software."

