
   CHICAGO--Producers of the long-running Chicago Public Radio program
   This American Life announced Monday that they have completed their
   comprehensive 12-year survey of life as a modern upper-middle-class
   American.
   [4]Enlarge Image Ira Glass 

   Ira Glass compares completing the series to finding out he is a
   relative of composer Philip Glass.

   In what cultural anthropologists are calling a "colossal achievement"
   in the study of white-collar professionals, the popular radio show has
   successfully isolated all 7,442 known characteristics of college
   graduates who earn between $62,500 and $125,000 per year and feel
   strongly that something should be done about global warming.

   "We've done it," said senior producer Julie Snyder, who was personally
   interviewed for a 2003 This American Life episode, "Going Eclectic,"
   in which she described what it's like to be a bilingual member of the
   ACLU trained in kite-making by a Japanese stepfather. "There is not a
   single existential crisis or self-congratulatory epiphany that has
   been or could be experienced by a left-leaning agnostic that we have
   not exhaustively documented and grouped by theme."

   Added Snyder, "We here at public radio couldn't be more pleased with
   ourselves."

   The final episode, which explored the universal tribulations of having
   to live with roommates again in one's mid-30s after a divorce,
   provided an apt bookend for the project. The completed work is
   expected to be an indispensable source of information for years to
   come about the thoughts and tastes of bespectacled cynics prone to
   neuroses who are actually doing just fine.
     Topics Covered

   This American Life host and producer Ira Glass began work on the
   project in 1995 in Chicago, where he found himself inspired by and
   catering to an audience of professionals who dine out frequently and
   have a hard time getting angry. Glass and his team of producers,
   writers, and interns set about the exhausting task of gathering all
   available information on a range of subjects from minor skirmishes
   with the law to the rewards of occasionally talking to poor people.
   The raw data was then analyzed, deconstructed, reconstructed,
   re-deconstructed, organized under a broad philosophical title, and
   interspliced with musical interludes by rock duo They Might Be Giants.

   Though This American Life is now lauded as the definitive source for
   material about getting an autistic teenager admitted to Harvard, its
   early run was marked by painful trial-and-error, according to producer
   Alex Blumberg.

   "At first, we were getting a lot of stories from recovered drug
   addicts and East African refugees living in the States, which had
   their compelling elements but came off a bit cloying," Blumberg said.
   "But then we realized that if we had overeducated people with voices
   rather unsuitable for radio narrate the stories with clever analogies
   and accessible morals, the whole thing would come off far less
   depressing."

   Blumberg said that the turning point came in 1997, when producers
   discovered a group of inner-city schoolchildren inadvertently teaching
   an important lesson to their attractive, suburban-raised teacher about
   what makes us human.

   Also aiding the study were the many contributors to This American
   Life, who took time from their best-selling essay-writing careers to
   donate personal anecdotes about dropping out of prestigious art
   schools, taking harrowing but poignant childhood vacations to the
   Grand Canyon, and the unique challenges of growing up in families
   supportive of their homosexuality.

   On Sunday, writer and contributing editor Sarah Vowell called the
   project's end "oddly anticlimactic," but questioned whether work was
   actually complete because the show had not yet addressed the subject
   of "Things Ending."

   "Seeing this project through to its culmination was equally satisfying
   and strange," said Vowell, speaking at a book signing in Colonial
   Williamsburg dressed as Betsy Ross. "I feel not unlike the early
   Pilgrims, who, standing atop Plymouth Rock after a long and arduous
   sea voyage, reflected on their journey, perhaps thinking to themselves
   'For God's sake--doesn't anybody have anything to eat in this
   settlement?'"

   Glass, who personally contributed over 2,000 anecdotes from his own
   life for documentation, called the project's conclusion the "end of an
   era."

   "When we finished, I have to tell you, I felt something I never
   expected: a profound sense of contentment--maybe even relief," Glass
   said. "Afterwards, the other producers and I sat around for a long
   while, remarking on how interesting and strange it was to finally
   complete the study, and how perhaps it is, in some way, symbolic of
   life in general."

