
   GREEN BAY--Three-time MVP and undisputed future Hall of Fame
   quarterback Brett Favre, disappointed with the Packers' refusal to
   aggressively pursue receiver Randy Moss and frustrated with his team's
   apparent indifference to making immediate improvements on offense, is
   demanding a trade to the team he feels will give him the best shot at
   winning a last Super Bowl ring before his retirement: the 1996 Green
   Bay Packers.
   [4]Enlarge Image Brett Favre 

   "I just don't think this Packer team, and GM Ted Thompson especially,
   is thinking in terms of winning with me," said Favre, speaking to
   reporters at his charity golf tournament in Mississippi Sunday. "On
   the other hand, 1996 Packers GM Ron Wolf is committed to building the
   team completely around me. I don't think it's out of the question to
   say that with me behind center, the 1996 Packers are looking at going
   all the way to the Super Bowl."

   Early reports had indicated that Favre was so upset that his team
   failed to close a draft-day deal for Randy Moss with the Oakland
   Raiders that his agent called Packers GM Ted Thompson and requested a
   trade to a team with capable receivers.

   "Nothing against Donald [Driver] and Greg [Jennings], but if I can't
   throw it to Randy Moss, then I want to throw it to Antonio Freeman,
   Robert Brooks, and Don Beebe," Favre said. "I bet with them, I'd have
   more of a chance of throwing for, say, 3,899 yards and 39 touchdowns,
   with maybe as few as 13 interceptions. Who knows? That kind of
   production could even get me another MVP award, although of course
   that's much less important than leading the '96 Pack to another Super
   Bowl victory."

   Favre also noted that, unlike the young and unproven 2007 Packers, the
   1996 Packers boasted seasoned veterans on both sides of the ball.

   "It sure would be great to play alongside Reggie White again--I get
   chills just thinking about seeing him in the locker room," Favre said.
   "That whole '96 defense is great, too. Santana Dotson is a force in
   the middle. That LeRoy Butler, I tell you, he's one of the most
   underrated safeties in the game. Desmond Howard isn't a bad kick
   returner, either. And unlike the Packer backfield I got now, the '96
   Packers still feature William Henderson at fullback."

   "Mark Chmura, though, I don't know," Favre admitted. "Decent tight
   end, but something about him isn't quite right."

   In addition to the more elite personnel, Favre praised the aggressive
   attitude of the coaching squad and front office of the Packers of
   1996, saying he was a fan of head coach Mike Holmgren's West Coast
   offense and Wolf's aggressive recruiting strategies.

   "I think Holmgren and I would make an interesting team," Favre said.
   "He could teach me a lot. We could learn from each other. And I know
   Ron Wolf would have my back. If, say, our number-one receiver gets
   knocked out for the season in Week 7, I believe Wolf would go right
   after a great veteran free agent, like maybe Andre Rison, to give us
   an edge in the playoffs. I can almost guarantee that."

   "It would really be something," Favre said. "We'd be one of the
   all-time great teams, a once-in-a-lifetime thing, you know? I'm going
   to have my agent look into it right away."

   Although the Packers had no immediate comment, head coach Mike
   McCarthy said the team would be "heartbroken" to part with its
   greatest player, although in deference to Favre's long service, and
   for the good of the current team, they would be willing to consider a
   trade package including a first-round pick in the 2008 NFL draft and
   the 1996 Brett Favre.

