
   WASHINGTON, DC--Citing centuries of quality- control issues that have
   resulted in chronic unreliability, cascading system failures, and even
   total unit shutdown, the American Pug Breeders Association announced a
   recall Monday of all pugs produced between February 2006 and the
   present day.
   [4]Enlarge Image Dog Breeders 

   "We apologize wholeheartedly to any and all owners of the 2007 pug,"
   APBA director Betty McAndrews said at a press conference, standing
   before a table where 10 defective pugs were displayed. "While pug
   owners are accustomed to dog malfunction, the latest animals are prone
   to more problems than just the usual joint failures, overheating,
   seizures, chronic respiratory defects, and inability to breed without
   assistance. The latest model pug is simply not in any way a viable
   dog."

   According to the APBA's online recall notice, pugs produced in the
   specified period are at "moderate to high risk" for convulsive
   respiratory failure, soft palate suppuration, corneal ulcers leading
   to sudden deliquescence of the eyeballs, catastrophic lung collapse,
   ingrown ribs, diabetes, patellar luxation, encephalitis, Lou Gehrig's
   pug's disease, impacted hips, neck dysplasia, tracheal fissures,
   morbid obesity, cranial arthritis, and leakage of the anal sacs. In
   addition, due to strong allergic reactions to almost all medications,
   97 percent of pugs are untreatable.
   [5]Recalled Pugs 

   Recalled Pugs

   This week, the APBA has begun to send out recall information and
   cardboard mailing boxes to registered pug owners, who are asked to
   place their '07 pug inside the box, seal it, and, if they wish, punch
   air holes in the top and sides. Owners must then put the box inside an
   airtight heavy-duty plastic bag, affix a postage-paid mailing label,
   and drop it off at any U.S. post office.

   In order to ensure that all '07 pugs are taken out of circulation, the
   organization is also providing a complimentary on-site disposal
   service to pug owners who are otherwise unable to participate in the
   recall.

   "We'd prefer to destroy all units here at our headquarters--we already
   have the chimneys going day and night," McAndrews said. "But the very
   young and the very old seem rather reluctant to send in their pugs,
   despite all of their well-documented flaws. To protect our reputation
   as pug breeders, we're going to spend the next month visiting
   individual homes and putting these dogs out of everyone's misery."

   For Mason City, IA pug owner Lee Kraus, the APBA's announcement comes
   as a complete vindication after years of contending with defective
   pugs. In the past five years alone, Kraus has attempted to return
   three of the dogs to his local breeder, and each time has been denied
   either a refund or an exchange for a more reliable make, such as a
   Shih Tzu.

   "I'm glad to see the APBA is finally taking responsibility for this
   disaster," Kraus said. "Governor Fattpants gave me insomnia with his
   constant snorting, and Boiler ruined my bedroom set when he went into
   total renal shutdown."

   Cindy Anderson of the Sarasota, FL-based Pug Owners Group shares
   Kraus's frustration with the highly developed breed.

   "After trying and failing to nurse Princess Kevin through hemorrhagic
   lupus and Boatsley through a hysterical tubal pregnancy, I don't know
   if I'll ever own another pug," Anderson said. "It's not worth the
   hassle."

   "Oh, who am I kidding? They're just so cute!" she added. "I love their
   adorable snorting and their funny little waddle. We're going to call
   our next one Lopez."

