
   MIDDLEBURY, VT--"Life begins at 90." So goes the motto of spunky area
   senior Archibald Munson, 91 years young and still as active as ever.
   While others may imagine retired life to be dull, this resident of the
   Middlebury Home For The Aged stays active and vital with his favorite
   hobby-filling his trousers with his own bowel movements up to 40 hours
   a week!

   [4]Enlarge Image Area Senior Stays Active 

   Archibald Munson

   State-regulated dietary requirements guarantee that Munson gets three
   high-roughage meals a day, keeping him regular and ensuring the hefty,
   high-volume defecations that keep him on top of his game. While
   nursing-home staffers say that trouser-filling among 90-year-olds is
   common, Munson continually impresses, rising above the crowd with the
   most voluminously packed trousers on the ward.

   Yes, while many seniors fill their pants on occasion, Munson is
   clearly the champ. Moving his bowels with incredible regularity allows
   this sporty old-timer to stay in tip-top shape, a lesson we could all
   afford to learn.

   "He's not very lucid, as over the years Alzheimer's has caused most of
   the higher functions of his brain to erode," said Dr. Frank Gehry, who
   checks in on Munson once a week. "Yet, despite his dim awareness of
   his surroundings and identity, Archie's fighting spirit remains strong
   as a bull. He is blessed with incredible will power, which continually
   pushes him to keep filling his pants more voluminously and frequently
   than before."

   With a reputation like that, Munson has more than earned the respect
   of those around him. "Arch maintains a strict program of 10 to 20
   trouser-fillings each morning, afternoon and evening, as well as at
   least one or two bedsheet changes during the night while he sleeps,"
   said nursing assistant Gwen Travis, Munson's state-appointed
   caregiver. "He's a real trooper, the way he just keeps filling and
   filling his pants without ever tiring, day after day."

   And it's not just his trousers he fills, either. According to
   nursing-home staffers, Munson's Texas-sized loads have also been found
   in some of the darnedest spots: the laundry-room dryer, pillowcases, a
   big box of rubber gloves nurses use when cleaning up urine. Even in
   other residents' shoes!

   And when he's finished unloading, Munson still remains plenty active,
   fighting and struggling with nursing-home personnel as they attempt to
   remove his clothes and clean him up. In one instance, he even bit
   through an orderly's skin.

   "He's really proud of his achievements," Travis said. She then smiled,
   adding, "Sometimes, he tenaciously clings to the accumulated fecal
   matter, like he doesn't want us to take it away!"

   Through sheer perseverance, Munson has increased fecal volume per
   evacuation by more than 60 percent since 1995. What's more, he now
   defecates up to six cubic inches at a time, a figure that has stunned
   medical experts and nursing-home officials alike.

   Never content to rest on his laurels, Munson continually strives to
   reach ever-greater defecatory heights. Pacing himself against other
   retirees during walks at the local shopping mall, Munson can fill his
   trousers up to eight times during a single two-hour walk, beating out
   other mall-walking seniors by a wide margin.

   With all his achievements, it's not surprising that Munson has become
   a true celebrity in Middlebury. In the whole town, there's not a
   single resident who doesn't recognize his trademark lumpy trousers or
   his well-known training slogan of, "Where the hell's my goddamned
   wife, you bastards!"--a fond tribute to his wife Edna, who died in
   1978.

   Not that trouser-soiling is Munson's only interest. Far from it! His
   favorite TV show is Rat Patrol, and staffers can always tell how much
   he enjoys it by the way he hurls large wads of his feces at the
   rec-room television set whenever the show is on.

   As if all that weren't enough, he also loves working with kids. He
   once wowed a fourth-grade class of Christmas carolers by expelling an
   entire pound of excrement in excitement. Now that's the Christmas
   spirit! Archibald Munson: We salute you!

