
   GRAND PLAINS, NE--A tight-knit rural Midwestern farming community
   commemorated the demonization of homosexuality Sunday with its annual
   Gay Shame Parade, a three-decade-old tradition that has become a
   cornerstone of the town's cultural identity.
   [4]Enlarge Image Small Town 

   The second-place float in this year's parade cruises down Grand
   Plains' picturesque Main Street.

   "Every year, the whole town turns out to enjoy Nebraska's famous
   summer sunshine, sample foods, browse the craft bazaar, and shame
   homosexuals for their repulsive, decadent behavior," said Frank
   Mitchell, mayor of Grand Plains, NE and parade marshal. "This year was
   our biggest turnout yet. Everybody had so much fun ostracizing the
   gays."

   The parade featured the usual assemblage of police cruisers, fire
   trucks, antique cars, and farm equipment, which local residents had
   draped in red-white-and-blue banners that read "Burn in the Eternal
   Flames of Hell!" City Councilman Fred Brandeen, this year's "Jesus,"
   entertained children by making mock finger-wagging gestures of
   admonishment and passing out buttons bearing the parade's traditional
   slogan: "NO!" Members of the Grand Plains Area Wives Association
   followed behind with a 15-foot hand-sewn banner, cosponsored by
   Jerry's Auto Body, which read: "GPAWA and Jerry's Cringe To Think What
   You're Putting Your Family Through."

   Organized every year by the Grand Plains City Council and a coalition
   of area churches, the Gay Shame Parade has been an annual event here
   since 1977, the year that citizens first became aware of gay people's
   existence.

   "To see a whole community rally together like this around a good
   cause--it's really an inspiration," said Ellen Lundblom, a mother of
   four enjoying the festivities with her youngest son, first-time
   reveler Timmy, 3. "If I were a lesbian, this would have really made me
   feel awful about myself."

   "My favorite part was the balloons," Timmy Lundblom said. "They had
   all different colors of angry frowny-faces on them."

   The event got off to a rousing start with the Grand Plains High School
   Cougars marching band playing such classics as "The Star-Spangled
   Banner" and "Onward, Christian Soldiers." The mood grew palpably more
   sober during the middle portion of the procession, as members of the
   Grand Plains Baptist Church marched with folded arms in stony,
   judgmental silence and stared at the spectators lining the streets as
   if to ask, "Are you gay?"

   The spirit of levity returned, however, toward the parade's finish,
   which featured balloon giveaways, a float contest, and an appearance
   by 6-year-olds Christopher Weiland and Courtney Wendt, who were
   crowned "Junior Mister and Miss Heterosexual" on Saturday. The parade
   concluded with a group reading of Leviticus 20:13.

   After the last bit of confetti fell, spectators praised the parade's
   highlights, including a float, presented by local Little League team
   the Tigers that depicts a mother, sitting alone with her head down on
   a kitchen table, crying. The first-place ribbon went to "Sodom and
   Gomorrah," a miniature version of the two Biblical cities engulfed in
   flames. The float's designer, McPhee's Department Store window dresser
   Bruce Carlson, was not able to accept his prize, however, as he was
   away visiting an aunt in Lawrence, KS for the weekend.

   Despite the pageantry, parade organizers stressed that the event has a
   serious message.

   "Everyone loves a parade," PTA chairwoman Agatha Buell said. "But it's
   about a lot more than the clowns, the decorations, and those Shriner
   fellows in their tiny cars. It's about making folks feel sickened by
   the deviant homosexual lifestyle, like God wants us to."

   Spectators couldn't help but be delighted by the parade's surprise
   finale, when, after dutifully leading the marching band for the entire
   mile-long parade route, local music teacher Colin Atherton was marched
   past the county line and told never, ever to return.

