
   MINNEAPOLIS--The tragic Minneapolis bridge collapse that left 13 dead
   this August brought national attention to the country's crumbling
   infrastructure, forcing many to question whether the nation's rapidly
   deteriorating roads, contaminated drinking water and groundwater, and
   run-down schools could perhaps be a metaphor for something.
   [4]Enlarge Image Nation Crumbling 

   The scale of destruction and loss of human life must surely mean
   something.

   In late 2007, the American Society of Civil Engineers conducted a full
   investigation into the nation's dams, highways, and public utilities,
   and gave the United States an overall grade of "D" for its upkeep.
   Unfortunately, however, the agency was unable to determine what, if
   anything, the country's complete and utter failure in every category
   it measures might mean in a larger sense.

   "Everywhere you turn you see improperly maintained railways,
   structurally deficient bridges--not to mention billions of gallons of
   untreated sewage flowing directly into our groundwater," said Adam
   Perry, a representative for the ASCE. "Is there an underlying message
   here? There are so many layers, and each one is so subtle and nuanced,
   that I'm hesitant to make any kind of blanket statement about what
   this means 'for America.'"

   "I think our overstretched and increasingly obsolete infrastructure
   might symbolize something important," Perry added. "But what?"

   With more than 350,000 contaminated industrial sites requiring cleanup
   and more than 50 percent of the nation's inland commercial waterways
   unusable, the ASCE and Congress launched a joint initiative last March
   to determine if the dilapidated infrastructure is a metaphor for some
   bigger, unknown issue or, alternatively, an allegory of something
   possibly having to do with the future or the nature of Fate.

   In early November, House Speaker Nancy Pelosi reported that, while the
   $2.3 billion project had yet to yield any definitive answers as to
   what thousands of unsafe dams might represent, it had provided some
   "very thought-provoking" ideas.

   "We're pretty sure the clogged highways are a metaphor for the
   ceaseless advancement of Time," said Pelosi. "And if we take our
   outdated and poorly maintained electrical grids to be a physical
   manifestation of lightning--the classic portent--then we have every
   reason to believe something big is about to happen."

   While it is unclear what purpose the crumbling infrastructure metaphor
   serves when taken in context of the nation's history, neither the ASCE
   nor Congress have ruled out the possibility that the United States is
   just one big coming-of-age story.

