
   ATLANTA--The NCAA tournament field narrowed a little further--and
   became much more intense--on Monday night as the University of Florida
   tallied a convincing 84-75 victory over Ohio State University to
   advance further into college basketball's championship, making 2007
   the second time in as many years that Florida has reached the NCAA
   Tournament's Round Of One.

   However, Florida head coach Billy Donovan says that this time around,
   his team hopes to win it all.
   [4]Enlarge Image NCAA Tournament 

   "Anyone who knows their college hoops will tell you that the Round Of
   One is when the real tournament begins," said Donovan during the
   post-game press conference from Atlanta's Georgia Dome, adding that
   his team could go down as one of the best in the history of college
   basketball if they can advance past the next few rounds. "This was a
   great victory for our team, and a good confidence-booster, but it
   doesn't mean anything if we don't win next week."

   "I'm just going to enjoy this victory for tonight," he added,
   responding to a questions about possible adjustments the Gators will
   have to make in the future. "But tomorrow it's back to work. It only
   gets harder from here on out, folks."

   Thus far, Florida has moved methodically through the tournament,
   easily making it into the Round Of 32, the Sweet 16, Elite Eight, and
   the Final Four, but now has to deal once again with the pressures that
   accompany being the Wondrous One.

   "Last tournament we were a young team--we weren't ready for all the
   media attention and the grind. This year, we are totally focused,"
   said star center Joakim Noah, who was voted Most Outstanding Player of
   the 2006 Wondrous One for his play against UCLA, but struggled visibly
   with endurance and composure in subsequent rounds. "This is why I came
   back to Florida--to get past the Round Of One and, hopefully, on to
   the championship. I had something to prove, and so did this entire
   team. We're hungrier than we've ever been."

   Noah added that he made the mistake of playing too hard in last year's
   regular season and failed to pace himself through the early rounds of
   the tournament, and credits his steady but unspectacular 12
   points-per-game average this year as part of a concerted effort to
   save his energy.

   "I think Florida definitely has what it takes," said ESPN college
   basketball analyst Digger Phelps, who will call Florida's next game.
   "But there is so much pressure at this stage in the tournament that if
   a team comes out flat like, say, UCLA did in 1972, you just never
   know. That's what makes the tournament so exciting."

   Ohio State coach Thad Madda admitted in an interview outside a somber
   Ohio State locker room that his young team was "just not ready" to
   play amongst the elite, even going so far as to say that if his team
   did defeat Florida to move on in the tournament he would have had to
   contend with players wanting to go home at the end of their semesters
   in late April.

   "Heck, to win your final game, and end the NCAA Tournament with a
   couple dozen victories and no losses is everyone's dream, but
   truthfully, I don't know if [center] Greg [Oden] would have even been
   able to play in the championship game," Madda said, referring to the
   possibility of Oden being drafted by the NBA on June 28, two weeks
   before the final round of the NCAA Tournament. "I certainly wish
   Florida the best of luck the rest of the way."

   Though college basketball fans across the nation have enjoyed the
   tournament's close games, many are hoping that there are some upsets
   as tournament play continues in Charlotte, Pittsburgh, New Orleans,
   and Portland.  Fans will surely be glued to their television sets as
   all weekend games can be seen on CBS, while games during the week will
   air on ESPN, with the overflow being broadcast on ESPN 2.

   "I made a few crazy picks in my office pool that I'm hoping will pan
   out," Philadelphia resident Geoff Caldwell said. "Luckily, I had
   Florida going this far, but I don't think they'll make it to
   Nashville. After the Round Of One, the competition just gets too
   tough."

   If Florida does advance past the next round, it will be the farthest
   the Gators have advanced in the NCAA Tournament since it was
   fractionated in 1970.

