
   WASHINGTON, DC--In a nationally televised address reminiscent of
   President Kennedy's historic 1961 speech pledging to put a man on the
   moon, President Bush responded to the global warming crisis Monday by
   calling for the construction of a giant national air conditioner by
   the year 2015.
   [4]Enlarge Image National Air Conditioner 

   Concept art shows how the 800-mile-wide device would function on a
   "high cool" setting.

   "Climate change is real and it demands a real solution," Bush said.
   "Therefore, I am committed to dedicating all of the technology, all of
   the brainpower, and all of the resources we need in order to keep
   America cool and comfortable well into the 21st century."

   The National Air Conditioner Initiative is expected to be the largest
   public works project in the nation's history. Because technology
   capable of creating an air conditioner that can fulfill the cooling
   needs of a continental land mass does not presently exist, the
   president estimated that research and development alone will require
   at least $100 trillion in both federal and private sector funds.

   "The challenge of building an air conditioner for all Americans will
   be the greatest we have ever faced," Bush said. "But we must face it.
   We must act now to ensure that our children and our children's
   children can live in a world where they don't get sweaty and have to
   change their shirts all the time."
     Bush

   'We have a responsibility to future generations.'

   President Bush

   While Bush's speech left many questions unanswered, such as whether
   the one-touch cooling settings would be under federal or state
   jurisdiction, reaction from congressional Democrats and Republicans
   has been largely favorable.

   "I applaud the administration for finally taking this issue
   seriously," House Speaker Nancy Pelosi said. "Such a giant apparatus
   means that Americans from all walks of life, not just the wealthy and
   privileged, will be able to get relief from the rise in the Earth's
   surface temperature. And it will create a great many jobs. Just
   removing and rinsing out the huge filter will require tens of
   thousands of seasonal laborers."

   Petrochemical industry leaders voiced early support of the plan, which
   would stimulate additional exploration and production of oil and gas
   to satisfy the machine's staggering energy needs.

   Some fiscal conservatives, however, decry the cost of the project and
   the gargantuan electric bills that would result, saying that a series
   of mile-high oscillating fans stationed in the Pacific Northwest and
   blowing in the direction of the jet stream would accomplish
   essentially the same thing and save billions. Conservative commentator
   Pat Buchanan expressed his concern that illegal aliens would benefit
   unfairly from the air conditioner, since many of them work outside,
   and questioned President Bush's ability to "seal the nation's borders
   in order to keep the cool air in."

   Environmental groups like the Sierra Club have taken a tough stance on
   the president's plan, demanding it contain legally binding language
   that ensures the air conditioner will be switched to a special
   energy-conserving "sleep" setting when the country cools off at night.
   The White House has shown interest in an "economy mode" option that
   could be used in the event of a budgetary crisis, but it is still
   unknown whether such a massive unit would qualify for an Energy Star
   certification, let alone accommodate built-in money-saving features.

   The strongest opposition to the plan has come from Canada. Because the
   proposed National Air Conditioner would cover 90 percent of the state
   of North Dakota and face south, the U.S.'s northern neighbor would be
   directly in the path of superheated air expelled from the machine's
   back vents. Though Prime Minister Stephen Harper said this would
   create drought conditions and devastate their farmlands, most believe
   Canada lacks the clout to halt Bush's air-conditioning agenda.

   American air conditioner manufacturers, with whom President Bush
   reportedly consulted extensively prior to announcing the initiative,
   will soon be awarded tens of trillions of dollars to design and build
   the components necessary for the giant unit. Industry leader Lennox is
   expected to receive at least $30 trillion, including a massive
   installation fee, while  the Carrier Corporation, Trane, and Amana are
   all jockeying for the next largest contracts.

   "Global warming threatens us all, whether we're mowing our lawns,
   rafting down a river in a national park, or driving to the end of the
   driveway to get our mail," Bush said. "The task that lies ahead is
   undeniably hard. But if we do not succeed, we will be profoundly
   inconvenienced. And I promise you: America will not let that happen."

   Speaking at a Democratic National Committee fundraiser Monday night,
   Al Gore said that now that Bush has taken up the cause of global
   warming, the former vice president and environmental activist will
   redirect his energies toward developing a personal spacecraft capable
   of transporting a family of four to a distant planet.

