
   POLOKWANE, SOUTH AFRICA--After three rainy seasons together, a black
   rhinoceros and a parasite-eating tickbird are beginning to suspect
   that their symbiotic relationship has fallen into a rut, the couple
   reported Sunday.

   "We're really symbiotic--almost too symbiotic," the rhino said. "It's
   just gotten so predictable lately that I'm starting to wonder, 'Is
   this all there is?'"
   [4]Enlarge Image Rhino Tickbird 

   The rhino and tickbird pass another morning on the African savannah
   not saying one word to each other.

   First meeting at a local watering hole in 2004, both creatures
   immediately saw themselves as natural for one other and, in the words
   of the rhino, felt something "new, gratifying, and mutually
   beneficial." Within hours, the tickbird had moved into the rhino's
   habitat and set up house on his thick hide.

   But as time went on, it slowly dawned on the couple that their
   partnership was perhaps merely one of convenience.

    "I admit, when we first got together, I was a total mess," the rhino
   said. "She really helped me clean up my act. But we've been together
   so long now that I always know exactly what she's going to do next."

   Devouring horsefly larvae embedded in her 3,000-pound partner's back,
   the tickbird seemed to agree that there was little fire left in their
   symbiotic relationship. At worst, she said, it feels like she and the
   rhino have been trapped in the same dead-end symbiosis for "countless
   millions of years."

   "We just go through the motions, and there's hardly any
   communication," the tickbird said. "And we do it the exact same way
   every time. I get on top and take the parasites off while he just lays
   there."

   "Feed off the embedded ticks on his hide, chirp when the predators
   come. Feed off the embedded ticks on his hide, chirp when the
   predators come. Where's the passion, the heat?" the tickbird
   continued.

   The tickbird also accused the rhino of trying to make her "feel
   small."

   "He doesn't realize everything I do for him," the tickbird said. "If
   it wasn't for my 'incessant squawking,' as he calls it, he would be
   shot by poachers before he even saw them coming."

   Both creatures separately expressed envy of their neighbors, a plover
   and crocodile, who "never seem to have the problems we do," the rhino
   said.

   "That crocodile appreciates having his teeth cleaned, and he makes
   sure she knows," the tickbird said. "Look at that big grin."

   The rhino said that he often feels like a victim of her nitpicking.

   "I might look tough, but I have feelings," the rhino said. "I give her
   plenty to eat and a great place to perch, but it feels like she's
   constantly pecking an open wound. Ugh, why can't we just be friends
   with mutualistic benefits?"

   The frustration has caused the pair to act out in passive-aggressive
   ways. The rhino will frequently charge without warning, jarring the
   tickbird from her perch. Meanwhile, the tickbird often deliberately
   embarrasses her partner by speculating aloud about a symbiotic
   relationship with a cape buffalo or zebra, often within earshot of
   those species.

   According to a nearby elephant, this sense of stagnancy commonly
   occurs in symbiotic partnerships across sub-Saharan Africa.

   "The rhino and tickbird may have evolved physiologically to meet each
   other's needs, but it's clear they haven't evolved emotionally," the
   elephant said. "They need to recognize that in order to go forward.
   The rhino's loud snorting  is very alienating. And obviously the
   tickbird is projecting her own feelings of inadequacy when she
   criticizes the rhino for being a typical Diceros bicornis."

   For all their friction, both creatures conceded that they weren't sure
   they could actually live without each other.

   "I don't know why we stay together," the rhino said. "I guess we're
   just creatures of instinctual habit."

