
   WASHINGTON--In a stunning reversal of more than 200 years of
   conventional wisdom, failure--traditionally believed to be an
   unacceptable outcome for a wide range of tasks and goals--is now
   increasingly seen as a viable alternative to success, sources
   confirmed Tuesday.

   "Americans have always been told that they should succeed at all
   costs," Emory University sociologist Dr. Lauren Hodge said. "But based
   on new evidence, this can no longer be called true--if, in fact, it
   ever was. As failure continues to dominate the American landscape,
   this mantra must be overruled."
   [4]Enlarge Image Failure Now An Option 

   "We have no choice but to revoke failure's non-optional status,
   effective immediately," Hodge continued. "Now all citizens will be
   able to step back, stare down the hardship and difficulty they will
   face in the pursuit of success, and say, 'Fuck that--this isn't worth
   it.'"

   Overturning one of America's most cherished and oft-repeated aphorisms
   is expected to have far-reaching implications for the future of human
   ambition. Some predict that a majority of the U.S. populace will now
   opt out of its previous obligation to give it 110 percent, and, in the
   coming weeks and months, give as little as 45 percent. For
   underachieving Americans, that number is expected to drop to as low as
   5 percent by March.

   A recent Interior Department report found that, although failure was
   not officially an option until this Tuesday, there have in fact been
   hundreds of billions of cases of it over the past two centuries,
   culminating in Fort Collins, CO high school junior Tim Kemp's failing
   grade on a physics exam last month.

   Many scholars now believe that such failures have historically been
   obscured by optimistic slogans and so-called positive thinking,
   neither of which, according to the report, has had a verifiable
   effect: Americans' overall failure rate went up nearly 2,350 percent
   over the past decade, with 1,435,643 instances of failure reported
   last Sunday alone.

   "In retrospect, failure becoming an option was inevitable," historian
   Michael Lambeau said. "The only difference is that now Americans can
   choose, without fear of being ostracized by society, to quit long
   before getting ahead."
   [5]Enlarge Image Failure Chart 

   Lambeau predicted a substantial decrease in the number of everyday
   Americans who fear failure, and a dramatic rise in those who actually
   embrace the once-reviled stench of defeat and disappointment.

   Other data seem to confirm the Interior Department's findings. A
   recent CBS News/New York Times poll revealed that 64 percent of
   Americans are "perfectly comfortable" with coming up just short, 43
   percent are content to try only once rather than try, try again, and
   an overwhelming 95 percent admitted that after falling down, they now
   prefer to stay down.

   Only 4 percent indicated having "some interest" in applying their
   balls to the wall.

   Though the broad new trend touches all 300 million citizens, experts
   said that sports coaches, CEOs of large corporations, U.S. Army
   commanders overseeing large-scale military operations, and anyone who
   often starts sentences with the word "gentlemen" will be most
   affected.

   While the ability to openly fail without detrimental consequence has
   been embraced by a majority of the population, some, such as social
   anthropologist Dr. Richard Groaten, claim it will have negative
   long-term effects for the country.

   "Sixty years ago, even mentioning that you might willingly give it
   less than your all would have been unthinkable," Groaten said. "It's a
   disgrace that modern Americans are more inclined to simply not get
   going, especially when the said going could be classified as 'tough.'"

   "I don't feel like doing this interview anymore," Groaten added.

