
   CINCINNATI--Overcome with a mixture of distaste at the almost certain
   future and a wistful sense at the way things could and should have
   been, baseball fans across America took time to address veteran Reds
   superstar Ken Griffey Jr. yesterday in order to let him know that they
   sincerely wish that Griffey, and not Barry Bonds, was on the verge of
   hitting his record-breaking 756th home run.
   [4]Enlarge Image Ken Griffey 

   "Don't take this the wrong way, Mr. Griffey, because the last thing we
   as a nation want is for you to think you've disappointed us by not
   breaking this record," the country's message, which was read to a
   quiet and humble Griffey by retired Seattle, WA-area mechanical
   engineer and lifelong baseball fan Robert Colgrave, began. "America
   knows you did everything you could, and we couldn't be more proud of
   you. In fact, that's the whole point--we think you're a man who is
   actually worthy of this record."

   "Believe us, if life was as fair as baseball, you'd have 760 homers
   right now," said Colgrave, pausing as if momentarily overcome. "More,
   even. And you'd still be chalking them up. You're a natural talent.
   God's gift to the baseball diamond. It's just... Damn bad luck, is
   all. Bad luck and trouble."

   The likeable but injury-plagued Griffey currently stands eighth on the
   all-time home-run list with 574, only nine back from Mark McGwire in
   seventh. However, America insists that without the bizarre injuries
   that plagued his career, Griffey would have had a legitimate shot at
   hitting 756.

   "I mean, when a guy misses out on the Rookie of the Year because he
   slips and hurts his wrist in the shower... Where's the sense in that?"
   America said. "Being denied the single-season home run record in 1994
   because of the baseball strike? Not fair. It's amazing that with every
   bad hand you've been dealt that you haven't packed it in and called it
   a day. Frankly, you're an inspiration--unlike some players this nation
   could name."

   The nation then went out of its way to praise Griffey for the many
   great moments and high points of Griffey's career, claiming it had
   "always meant to do so but never seemed to find the right moment."
   Special attention was paid to Griffey's decision to play for his
   father's old team, wearing his father's No. 30, in the city of his
   youth; his decision to wear Jackie Robinson's No. 42 on Jackie
   Robinson Day, and to encourage other players to do so; and his
   appearance on The Fresh Prince Of Bel-Air.

   Throughout the address, the nation emphasized the humility, grace, and
   joy with which Griffey embraced the national pastime. They talked
   about buying his batting gloves and signature baseball cleats as
   children, imitating his stance and perfect home-run swing in batting
   cages, and how they would ask their father's to hit long fly balls so
   they could make "Griffey-esque" catches in centerfield. They talked
   about his 1989 Upper Deck rookie card, and how, instead of going down
   in value with every hamstring injury, it should have skyrocketed in
   price with his 800th, maybe 900th home run. They talked about the guy
   who made wearing baseball caps backwards cool. And they talked about
   the elation they felt when Griffey became the first one to ever hit
   the Camden Yards Warehouse during a monstrous shot in 1993's Home Run
   Derby.

   "I would be proud to have Ken Griffey Jr. break my home-run record,"
   current record-holder and Hall of Fame legend Hank Aaron said upon
   being told of the nation's statement. "I would most certainly attend
   any game in which he had a chance of doing so. And I would come down
   from the stands and hug him fiercely after he crossed the plate and
   had been congratulated by his teammates. I really don't think I'd be
   able to help myself."

   "Hell, I'll probably attend the game he's playing in when my record is
   broken in any case," Aaron added.

   Baseball commissioner Bud Selig, responding to overwhelming demand,
   has confirmed that an asterisk will be placed next to Griffey's name
   in the record books in order to indicate that, in a perfect world
   where dignity is always rewarded, cheaters never triumph, and people
   always get what they really deserve, Griffey would have hit one more
   home run than Barry Bonds' career total.

