
   PARIS--A small but enthusiastic crowd of several dozen was on hand at
   the Tour de France's finish line on the Avenue des Champs-Élysées
   Tuesday to applaud the efforts of the 28 cyclists who completed the
   grueling 20-stage, 2,208.3-mile race without the aid of
   performance-enhancing drugs.
   [4]Enlarge Image Non Doping 

   Great Britain's Bradley Wiggins finished the final 56km time trial in
   a respectable and drug-free 4 hours and 38 minutes.

   Finland's Piet Kvistik, a domestique with the Crédit Mondial team, was
   this year's highest-finishing non-doping rider (142nd overall).
   Kvistik claimed the maillot propre, the blue jersey worn by the
   highest-placed "clean" rider, on the ninth stage of the race when the
   six riders who had previously worn it tested positive for EPO,
   elevated levels of testosterone, and blood-packing.

   "This is a very, very proud day for me," said the 115-pound Kvistik,
   who lost 45% of his body mass during the event, toppled from his
   saddle moments after finishing, and had to be administered oxygen, fed
   intravenously, and injected with adrenaline by attending medical
   personnel. "They say it is physically impossible to ride all of the
   Tour without drugs, but we prove them wrong this day."

   "What day is it, anyway?" asked Kvistik, his eyes rolling wildly in
   his head. "I can no longer tell."

   Kvistik's overall time for the Tour was 571 hours, 22 minutes, and 33
   seconds, beating by over an hour the previous record for a
   non-enhanced rider, set by Albrect Påart during 1923's infamous
   ether-and-morphine-shortened race. Kvistik finished a mere 480 hours
   behind Alberto Contador, the overall winner, making 2007's margin
   between doping and non-doping riders the closest in history.

   "It became most difficult for us on the 7th stage, which was almost
   200 kilometers and the first stage through the mountains," Kvistik
   said while accepting the non-doping victor's 100-franc check from his
   stretcher. "Not only did the excruciating pain and weakness in my legs
   make it difficult to walk my bike on the steeper stretches, it was
   mentally very hard to know that half the other clean riders were dead
   or dying. Also, the other 141 riders finished the Tour in Paris that
   morning, which made it all that much harder."

   "It's rather a shame that the Tour's 'clean' riders, or 'lanternes
   naturelles' as the fans call them, receive so little attention, for
   their monumental achievement," said cycling commentator Phil Liggett,
   reporting on the non-doping riders' finish for Versus-2, the
   little-sister network to Versus, who carried the main Tour de France
   coverage. "It's nearly impossible to compete in the full Tour while
   shot full of human growth hormone, erythropoietin, testosterone,
   glucocorticosteroids, synthetic testosterone, anabolic steroids, horse
   testosterone, amphetamines, and one's own pre-packed oxygen-rich red
   blood cells. To do it on water and bananas is almost heroic, no matter
   what one's time is."

   While Kvistik's achievement is being celebrated by cycling insiders,
   critics of the Tour de France maintain that not enough is being done
   to combat the use of performance-enhancing substances in cycling's
   premier event.

   "Nonsense--pure nonsense," said Tour general director Christian
   Prudhomme, who was vacationing in Switzerland as Kvistik crossed the
   finish line. "We have done everything we could imagine, both in terms
   of prize money and other incentives, to promote riders who compete
   without pharmaceutical aid. But we simply do not have the resources,
   nor the viewers the interest, to televise the entire two months it
   takes for a normal, unadulterated human to circumnavigate an entire
   nation on a bicycle."

   Kvistik remains in critical condition at the Hôpital
   Neuilly-sur-Seine, where he was placed in a medically induced coma to
   aid his recovery from exhaustion, malnutrition, and loss of bone
   density. Attending physicians say he is not expected to return to
   cycling.

