
   NEW YORK--A feature on the New York Times' website that lists the
   stories most e-mailed by readers is destroying morale and escalating
   tensions among the once-dignified and professional Times staff,
   sources within the newspaper of record said Tuesday.
   [4]Enlarge Image Most Emailed 

   The New York Times office building, which used to house some of the
   most respected journalists in America.

   This week's most frequently e-mailed story, titled "In Manhattan, Even
   Felines Have Therapists," which detailed the growing phenomenon of
   clinical depression among indoor urban cats, provoked a fresh round of
   envy and dismay among reporters still stinging from last week's top
   article, "Do You Really Have Time For Your Time-Share?".

   "Your reputation is everything here at the Times, and if you want get
   known, you've got to deliver what readers want: differences between
   men and women, and photos of cats," national political reporter Adam
   Nagourney said. "I suppose I could be most e-mailed, too, if I sat in
   front of my computer all day making up cutesy names for government
   officials, like some redheaded Wednesday and Saturday columnists I
   know."

   Along with most of his Times colleagues, Nagourney is convinced that
   online readers instinctively overlook harder news for the eye-catching
   Most E-Mailed box, making the pressure to craft articles with those
   magical "click and send" qualities that much more intense.

   Executive editor Bill Keller said he believes that the Most E-Mailed
   list is causing "troubling" changes in the Times' editorial focus, as
   reporters increasingly neglect less attractive assignments.

   "I've always encouraged our journalists to follow their instincts,"
   Keller said. "But now I'm considering a more hands-on approach,
   especially since I've received no fewer than four 800-word pieces on
   'man dates' in the past week alone."

   According to Times insiders, nearly two dozen staffers, including four
   Pulitzer Prize winners and Baghdad correspondent John Burns, have
   requested transfers to the Times' Home & Garden and Travel desks.

   Nagourney, currently stuck covering Barack Obama's presidential
   campaign in Minnesota, said he's been trying to make his stories more
   e-mail-friendly. But so far, success has eluded him.

   "I thought my Elizabeth Edwards breast cancer article the other week
   had a great chance, as it was at the intersection of politics, health,
   death, and family--and had the word 'breast' in the headline--but it
   didn't even make the top 10," Nagourney said. "Whatever."
     Most E Mailed Krugman

   "I'll write anything--do anything--to get on that list each week. I
   don't care what it takes."
   Times columnist Paul Krugman

   White House correspondent David Sanger recalled his anger last month
   after seeing New York Times publisher Arthur Sulzberger, Jr.
   compliment a first-year reporter who had gotten two stories on the
   Most E-Mailed list despite only having worked at the paper part-time
   for three months.

   "I know I write some boring stuff, but I'm forced to: It's my job,"
   Sanger said. "I've been here for almost 25 years, and Sulzberger
   hasn't said that many words to me the whole time."

   Restaurant critic and Most E-Mailed list darling Frank Bruni dismissed
   the inter-office grousing, saying, "Some people have it, some people
   never will." Bruni's work topped the Most E-Mailed list eight times in
   the past year.

   Other mainstays of the Most E-mailed List, such as columnist Frank
   Rich, experience the stress of having to maintain their success every
   week. While there are definite perks, such as sharing a lunch table
   with other widely e-mailed columnists, like Paul Krugman and Thomas
   Friedman, Rich said that the "once laid-back and carefree" working
   environment of the Times' midtown Manhattan offices has been replaced
   with suspicion and backbiting.

   "Yesterday I was working in my cubicle, and I could hear some
   reporters at the water cooler a few feet away talking in stage
   whispers about how I was 'obviously' getting my friends to e-mail my
   columns around to artificially inflate their ranking, and it was very
   upsetting," Rich said. "Sure, some of my friends may have e-mailed
   them, but that's because they honestly liked them and people have the
   right to do that."

   Columnist Nicholas Kristof, a Pulitzer Prize-winning former editor who
   has covered Asia and Africa for the Times, claimed not to be aware
   that his work frequently appears on the Most E-Mailed list, saying he
   "never so much as glances" at it.

   "Who cares--lists are stupid and arbitrary," Kristof said. "Only
   shallow morons pay attention to them. As if an article is inherently
   better just because more people happen to read it. This isn't a
   popularity contest."

   Kristof returned Thursday from the Sudan after a six-week-long
   investigation of the plight of displaced house cats in the
   genocide-ridden Darfur region. His findings will be published in next
   Sunday's New York Times Magazine.

