
   SAN FRANCISCO--Open-air preacher "Brother Sam" Hilson rescued more
   than 300 of God's children from appreciating a cloudless spring day at
   Golden Gate Park Tuesday by informing them of their sins and the swift
   approach of Judgment Day.
   [4]Enlarge Image Street Evangelist 

   "Brother Sam" Hilson rescues countless souls each weekend from the
   grips of a leisurely afternoon.

   A former building superintendent, Hilson said he was directly called
   by God to bring Christianity to San Francisco's unholy cyclists, tai
   chi practitioners, and dog walkers.

   "All of you will burn in hellfire, so sayeth the Lord," Hilson said to
   a stroller-bound toddler and her picnicking parents.

   For nearly five years, his highly personalized, one-on-one style of
   lay sermonizing has been among the most effective in the city, as
   virtually all park-goers within Hilson's range of vision are delivered
   from their conversations or badminton games within minutes.

   After telling a novel-reading Berkeley student that there was "no book
   but the Good Book," Hilson bore witness to a woman strolling by in a
   sundress.

   "Harlot, dare ye bare your shoulders when the Rapture is nigh?" Hilson
   said.

   Many of those who have been singled out by Hilson confirm the
   attention had a direct impact on their lives.

   "It was my first weekday off in a while, so I thought I'd enjoy the
   nice weather, maybe head down to the waterfront too," said Russ
   Tiderington, 25, who, according to Hilson, "sashay[ed] [his] hips like
   a painted Jezebel." "But I decided to go home and catch up on some
   chores instead."

   Hilson's bullhorn, which he often employs to bring recreation-seekers
   into the light of God's grace and drown out their iPod music, forced
   one-third to one-half of the souls to spurn the path they had chosen
   for that afternoon.

   At one point, Hilson ministered to a family of Indian-Americans, whom
   he mistakenly identified as "Muslim demon-worshippers."

   His photo-collage display of aborted fetuses, Hitler, Oui magazine
   centerfolds from the 1980s, and the rock band KISS spared at least 10
   others the temptation of the fresh April breeze.

   "Someday our jealous and vengeful God will make you regret watching
   your aerobics sex tapes!" Hilson told a group of  kite flyers, who
   rapidly walked away from him as he strayed momentarily in their
   direction. "Your kites may reach the sky, but they cannot get you into
   Heaven! Only Jesus can! Jesus is the One True Kite!"

   Though he is not formally recognized by any church, it is estimated
   that Hilson has reached nearly 75,000 wayward souls on college
   campuses, at state fairs, and in bus terminals around the Bay Area.

