
   MIAMI--South Florida residents were overcome with fear, confusion, and
   an unnerving sense of dread Tuesday when they learned that an
   unidentified hurricane is heading for their area--its origin
   uncertain, its intentions unclear, and perhaps most frightening, its
   name unknown.
   [4]Enlarge Image Nameless Hurricane 

   The vacant eye of the unnamed storm fixes its baleful stare on the
   Florida peninsula.

   "Who is this hurricane?" said Miami resident Beverly Motolla, just one
   of hundreds of thousands of citizens struggling to put a human face on
   this impending tragedy. "Why is it here? What does it want from us?"

   Such questions remain agonizingly unanswered, as the anonymous storm
   front shows no signs of slowing down or divulging its background.
   Lacking any reliable information on the character traits of the
   popularly dubbed "Hurricane That Shall Not Be Named," thousands have
   fled the area, hoping to escape its destructive winds, driving rain,
   and chilling impersonality.

   "If this hurricane were a Wilma or a Frank, or even a Rebekah, I'd at
   least know what to expect--a storm system with a low pressure center,
   sustained winds above 119 miles per hour, high gusts, and severe
   inland flooding," said Stewart Tomlinson, a Miami-area police officer
   who plans to drive his family north to Georgia on Wednesday. "But I
   don't even know if this hurricane is a boy or a girl. And frankly,
   that scares me."

   "I don't want this...thing...coming anywhere near me or my family,"
   Tomlinson added.
   [5]Enlarge Image Nameless Hurricane Jump 

   Whatever the coming storm's true name, Floridians, like these
   evacuating Pompano Beach residents, are praying it will not exceed in
   severity the infamous Hurricane !!! of 1983.

   Those who have decided to stay home and brave the imminent storm have
   reported incidents of raindrops rapping on their windowpanes with a
   sinister, relentless urgency; drops in barometric pressure so sudden
   they could freeze a man's soul; and, in the words of one Coral Springs
   body shop owner, "the kind of heartless devastation that could only be
   wreaked by an unfeeling tropical cyclone that doesn't even have the
   decency to introduce itself."

   "I heard that the hurricane killed 620 Guatemalans last week in cold
   blood," Mark Barclay of Sweetwater said. "And that it didn't even
   care."

   Though the hurricane is predicted to cause widespread destruction,
   many say it brings something even more dangerous than a 10-foot storm
   tide and rapidly contracting eyewall: the element of the unknown.

   "You can tell a lot about a hurricane by its name--that's why they
   have names," Surfside resident Brenda Harrison said. "Mitch, strong
   and unpredictable. Katrina, devious and vengeful. Bob, good guy, just
   passing through. But this hurricane could be anything. It could be a
   gentle mist, or it could be the worst natural disaster in the history
   of mankind. It could strike anytime, and it could be anywhere...even
   right behind you. Also, what if it doesn't even have an eye?"
     Nameless Hurricane Pullquot

   "For the love of Jesus, at least just give us a first initial."

   Kimberly Mellor,
   Opa-locka, FL

   "When the big hurricane struck Florida in 1998, I was scared until I
   found out its name was Earl," Panama City, FL citizen Sam Hewer said.
   "I went to high school with a guy named Earl. He was a little wild,
   but ultimately harmless. In fact, we used to make fun of him. So when
   the storm hit and destroyed my house, it didn't seem so bad. It was
   like, 'Oh, there goes Earl again.'"

   As the storm approaches the coast, citizens have been speculating as
   to its identity. Many claim that the hurricane's erratic changes in
   course and spiral rainbands make it seem like a Dave. Still others
   suspect that it might be Hurricane Andrew in disguise, returning to
   finish what it started in 1992.

   Also on Tuesday, the National Weather Service issued a statement in
   which it rejected calls to name the hurricane, describing such an
   action as "impossible."

   "We've monitored, studied, and examined this hurricane in the two
   weeks since it appeared seemingly out of nowhere on our radar, and it
   simply has no name," NWS acting director Mary Glackin said. "If it had
   one, we'd be using it. It's not like we can just make up a name."

   When asked if he could identify the storm, veteran WTVJ meteorologist
   Cal Valencia threw back his head and laughed scornfully.

   "Fools! Be glad you don't know this hurricane's true name!" Valencia
   said. "It may be the sole mercy we are shown during this coming
   ordeal. Savor it! For in a day's time, you will be pining for your
   lost ignorance as a drowning man for oxygen."

   One Miami-Dade citizen, however, has decided to take matters into his
   own hands.

   "For my wife and children's sake, I've decided to tell them it's named
   Bradley," said Jackson Graham, a local carpenter who claims he cannot
   bear to tell his family the horrible truth. "Hurricane Bradley. God, I
   hope that doesn't make it angrier."

