
   WASHINGTON--As his last term in office winds to a close, President
   Bush has directed White House aids and Cabinet staff to begin
   preparing for 2008, the nation's 232nd and final year in existence.

   "My fellow Americans, it has been an honor to be your last president,"
   said Bush during a televised address Tuesday, assuring citizens he
   would do everything possible over the next few months to promote a
   smooth transition into utter oblivion. "I want you all to know that I
   do not intend to let what precious little time we have left go to
   waste. That's why I ask all citizens to pull together and follow me,
   so we can accomplish everything we've ever wanted to before it all
   crumbles around us in a terrible belch of smoke and ash."

   Added Bush, "It's now or never, people. No regrets."

   As part of his ambitious 11-and-a-half-month plan, Bush has
   prioritized winning the War on Terror in order to secure Iraq's
   stability in a world where the U.S. is nothing more than a fleeting
   memory. Additionally, he has urged Congress to block upcoming
   stem-cell legislation "just in case," and has set aside the months of
   April and May to get in touch with all countries the U.S. has wronged
   in the past and apologize, and default on America's $9.16 trillion
   dollar international debt with a wild spending spree, respectively.
   [4]Enlarge Image Bush Begins Preparations For Nation's Final Year 

   A special executive committee has also been formed to draft the
   country's final words.

   In response to critics who claim Bush is a lame duck and plans to pass
   the responsibility of helplessly watching the collapse of society onto
   the next president, Bush said he is "still the commander in chief,"
   and remains dedicated to solidifying America's legacy before the
   darkness takes hold.

   "I am committed to making this the best damn Swan Song the world has
   ever seen," said Bush, after enclosing a copy of the Constitution and
   a recipe for corn dogs in an air-tight titanium capsule to be placed
   just across the Canadian border. "I know this looks like the end--and
   it is--but I intend to go out with a bang. Now, who's with me?"

   The president held a special America Wrap-Up press conference with
   members of the international press earlier today, where he spoke
   frankly with reporters and gave out long, heartfelt hugs. Bush also
   took time from his hectic schedule of staring blankly into the gaping
   maw of absolute dissolution to reflect on the country's past and look
   forward to its 281-day future.

   "Our great nation will be a shining, then blinking, then slowly fading
   beacon to the world," Bush said. "As our time as a sovereign country
   with borders and currency comes to a close, let us hope we will be
   remembered for all the great things we accomplished, and not for the
   1960s."

   "We sure did have some good times, didn't we?" Bush added.

   To help the members of Congress pass the time until both houses are a
   jagged shell of concrete and marble, looted of valuables by roving
   bands of nomadic warlords to sell for spears and kerosene, Bush
   submitted to the Senate a short list of what he called "Dream
   Projects" to be carried out in the tenuous weeks following Dec. 9,
   2008. The nation's last acts include approving one final
   all-encompassing tax break, launching a nationwide skydiving
   initiative, reducing carbon emissions by 1 percent over the next
   decade, and writing his memoirs.

   Members of the Bush Administration have consulted with top officials
   from the CIA, the FBI, NASA, the USDA, the Centers for Disease
   Control, noted scholars on the myth of Narcissus, a Chernobyl
   survivor, and the International Atomic Energy Agency to determine if
   the U.S. will indeed have time to carry out its final wishes. Bush,
   however, has instructed all Americans "not to get [their] hopes up."

   The Democrats, who will hold a majority in the House and Senate until
   the rule of law is supplanted by an especially savage series of blood
   feuds, have promised to work with the president for whatever it's
   worth.

   "None of that matters now, don't you see?" Speaker of the House Nancy
   Pelosi said. "What will it matter how many Kyoto Protocols we didn't
   sign or whether we're going to invade Iran in March? Have any of you
   ever seen a sunset--I mean really seen it?"

   While Congress continues to assist the president as we hurdle toward
   what is known in Norse mythology as Ragnarök or "Doom of the Gods,"
   some have expressed anger at Washington's perceived unwillingness to
   take action in the face of the coming wall of fire.

   "Are we just going to sit back and wait for January?" said Chelsea
   Furlong, a Tennessee resident and uninsured mother of three. "That's
   going to take forever. My branch is closing next month--can't we just
   get it over with then?"

