
   LOS ANGELES--If you ask Dale Henderson, a local assassin who
   celebrated his eighth wedding anniversary last month, lone gunman John
   Kingsley has no idea how good he has it.

   Able to stay out as late as he wants holding innocent civilians
   hostage, and free to make weekend murder plans without first getting
   permission from his wife, the 29-year-old bachelor is "as lucky as
   they come."
   [4]Enlarge Image Lone Gunman 

   Henderson, stuck at home doing chores again.

   "What I'd give to trade places with that guy," Henderson said Monday
   after watching Kingsley shoot up a community college campus on the
   evening news. "Running around firing indiscriminately into a crowd of
   people--now that's someone who doesn't have to wake up early to go
   furniture shopping tomorrow."

   "Enjoy it while it lasts, buddy," Henderson added. "Enjoy it while it
   lasts."

   Henderson, 37, who said he hasn't had a spare moment to himself atop
   an abandoned warehouse in months, openly admitted that he was jealous
   of Kingsley's lifestyle. Tired of always having to stop trailing a
   potential victim to pick up a gallon of milk, Henderson said he can
   only hope Kingsley doesn't take his freedom for granted.

   "John should appreciate how fortunate he is to be able to spend all
   night staring unblinkingly at his bedroom's ceiling fan," Henderson
   said. "Don't get me wrong, I love Sheila. But sometimes a man just
   needs some time alone to plan the untimely death of a local judge."

   After an afternoon spent wistfully leafing through old news clippings
   from his life as a carefree, single gunman, Henderson seemed to long
   for the days when he could walk up to any random attractive woman on
   the street, put a gun to her head, and pull the trigger without having
   to feel guilty.

   Henderson also said he wished he still had the freedom to cover the
   walls of his home with photos of supermodels, celebrity athletes, and
   other future targets rather than the dainty flower patterns his wife
   selected.

   "Often when I'm helping Sheila clean out the attic, I wonder what that
   lucky lone gunman is up to with all his spare time," Henderson said.
   "Probably climbing to the top of a clock tower or threatening to pump
   some worthless bastard full of lead if he calls the police."

   Added Henderson, "God, I know I would be."

   Kingsley's recent slaughter at an area McDonald's has also been
   difficult for the married gunman to endure, since his wife would
   "probably have [his] head" if he ever set foot inside a fast-food
   restaurant. And, with countless new responsibilities, Henderson
   claimed that, unlike Kingsley, the closest he ever gets to terrorizing
   a post office nowadays is going out to mail Christmas cards.

   "It must be nice not to have to answer to anyone, or explain where
   you've been all day," Henderson said. "And I can't imagine John has
   ever totally missed the visiting presidential motorcade because
   someone forgot to put gas in the car."

   Though Henderson remains jealous that, as a young wanted man, Kingsley
   gets to sleep in a different safe house every night, he admitted that
   matrimony still has its upsides.

   "It's nice to know there's always someone waiting there for you,
   regardless of how bad your day has been," Henderson said. "Plus, the
   alibi thing doesn't hurt."

