
   COLUMBUS, OH--In an announcement that received wide attention
   throughout Wolverine's tavern Tuesday, bar skanks Stephanie Fletcher
   and Jessica Keneally stated that they would share a passionate kiss at
   an unspecified time that evening.

   "Steph and I are totally hot for each other," Keneally said over the
   loud music to several unspecified bar patrons. "We're going to make
   out. We don't care who's watching."
   [4]Enlarge Image Bar Skanks 

   The skanks pose for one of the hundreds of pictures taken over the
   course of the night.

   According to eyewitnesses who looked up the second they walked in the
   door, the 22-year-old skanks arrived at the bar at approximately 10
   p.m, dressed in their usual skank attire of low-cut tank tops paired
   with either low-rider jeans or a short skirt, and exposed, brightly
   colored thongs.

   After downing their third cosmopolitans, the two skanks stood up and
   began grinding to the R. Kelly song "I'm a Flirt," which caused a
   nearby conversation about the Cleveland Indians to come to a sudden
   halt.

   "Quit staring," Keneally said to the approximately 25 male patrons in
   the immediate vicinity, all of whom were by that time involuntarily
   ogling the skank-ass pair. "Oh my God, you guys are such pervs."

   Fletcher would neither confirm nor deny that the kiss would involve
   tongue, saying that bargoers "would just have to wait."
   [5]Enlarge Image Bar Skanks 

   The skank duo gyrates lasciviously as a growing crowd of men capture
   mental images for later use.

   "Who knows what will go down," Fletcher said as she reached into
   Keneally's tight top and tweaked her left breast with her thumb and
   middle finger in front of seven rapt onlookers. "Possibly us."

   In previous months, Keneally and Fletcher have, either separately or
   together, shown off their lower-back tattoos, held a loud conversation
   about who had the larger breasts, and displayed their oral sex
   techniques on bottles of Bud Light. Neither is a lesbian.

   "Those chicks are all over each other-- awesome!" said 24-year-old
   Matt Lalley, one of dozens of slightly intoxicated males who, despite
   their highly evolved brains, were unable to stop looking at the
   suggestive twosome. "This is going to be the best night of my life."

   As the evening wore on, the skanks' hair grew lank and stringy,
   increasingly clinging to their sweaty faces despite frequent
   coquettish head tosses. The heat and close quarters of the small bar
   also caused  the sparkly body makeup worn by Fletcher to collect in
   the crevices of her collarbone and between her breasts. According to
   Wolverine's bartender Helene Dorman, the skanks also left thick hot
   pink lipstick prints on their drink glasses.

   However, none of these factors resulted in any decrease in the amount
   of attention paid to the skanks.

   "I just can't look away," said Frank Sturm, watching as Keneally
   leaned over the pool table to display her plunging neckline for the
   ninth time. "And the thing is, the one in the skirt isn't even all
   that hot."

   "I'd really like to think I'm above this," Sturm's friend, Greg
   Kleist, added. "But what can I say? I'm not. They're totally going to
   kiss."

   Not everyone was as enthusiastic about the pair's announcement. A
   28-year-old female bar patron rolled her eyes at the girls'
   predictable antics, and was immediately dismissed by Fletcher and
   Keneally as "jealous." The bartender reported that she'd seen similar
   scenes play out on countless other evenings.

   "You mean the one that flashed her tits last week is gonna make out
   with the girl who was telling everyone she wasn't wearing any
   underwear?" Dorman asked while setting out newly washed glasses.
   "Whatever."

   As of press time, the pair had still not kissed, as they were rumored
   to be waiting for someone to buy them another drink before astonishing
   onlookers with their shocking intra-gender lip-lock.

