
   NEW YORK--In a year that saw the release of such best-selling products
   as the Motorola RAZR 2 V8 and the wildly popular Casio XD-SW4800
   handheld dictionary, no personal electronics product launch was more
   highly anticipated than the November 13 debut of the second-generation
   Microsoft Zune mp3 player.
     Thousands Wait

   Consumers eagerly line up outside New York City's famous 5th Avenue
   24-hour Microsoft Store.

   The sleek new Zune, whose record-breaking sales have made the Zune
   name synonymous with "mp3 player," was so sought-after that thousands
   formed long lines outside hip, minimalist Microsoft Stores across the
   country days before the device went on sale. In Midtown Manhattan, the
   hysteria reached such a fever pitch that some were willing to pay as
   much as $200 for a spot in line.

   "How could you not want one?" said self-described "Microsoft fanatic"
   Maria Arkin, who, like many others scrambling to be among the first to
   get their hands on the new Zune, expressed disappointment upon
   learning that sales were limited to just two units per customer. "It's
   amazing. There's just nothing else like it on the market."

   Arkin added, "Plus, it's small enough to fit in my pocket--right next
   to my cell phone!"

   Even skeptics have found it difficult to deny the Zune's appeal. With
   its video capability, "squircle"-shaped control pad, Microsoft logo
   emblazoned on the back, and iconic black earbuds, it has become a
   must-have item for everyone from high-powered executives to trendy
   young scenesters. Many consumers consider owning the newest model of
   Zune to be the most essential status symbol of the past 10 years,
   hailing it as the hallmark fashion accessory of the so-called "Zune
   Generation."

   "The second-generation Zune has it all," said Brian Lam, editor in
   chief of Gizmodo, a popular tech blog. "It's got a great design, and
   the cult of personality that the undeniably charismatic Bill Gates has
   created with his Microsoft product launches only adds to the Zune's
   desirability."

   Though the Zune continues to dominate the world of personal
   electronics, technology experts believe it will quickly be
   overshadowed by the fall 2008 launch of the hotly anticipated new
   Texas Instruments TI-Nspire graphing calculator.

