
   CHULA VISTA, CA-Republican presidential candidate George W. Bush
   extended a hand of friendship to the nation's Hispanic community
   Monday, leaving a larger-than-customary tip for waiter Ramon Gonzalez
   after eating at La Galleria, a trendy Chula Vista bistro.

   [4]Enlarge Image Bush Reaches Out 

   Bush speaks during a campaign stop in Chula Vista, CA, where he
   courted Hispanics with a $20 tip.

   Bush-who was lunching with aide de camp Warren Hewitt and campaign
   contributor Kenneth Boehm, CEO of telecommunications giant Pacific
   Bell-left a $20 gratuity on a bill of $83.42. Working out to
   approximately 24 percent, it is the largest tip the Hispanic community
   has ever received from a Republican presidential candidate.

   Gonzalez, accepting Bush's generous overture on behalf of his people,
   thanked the candidate politely as he left the restaurant and invited
   him to visit again. Gonzalez said he intends to share the gift with
   other members of the Hispanic community, employing the standard
   food-service-industry split among waiter, busboy, and dishwasher.

   "This generous tip is my way of saying thank you to the Latino
   community for its distinguished service during the course of this
   lunch," Bush said. "It is my way of acknowledging the many valuable
   things America's Hispanics bring to the table-from appetizers to
   drinks to main courses-which are vital to the smooth progress of our
   nation's meals."

   Republican insiders are praising the gesture, noting that Bush has
   sent "a message of appreciation to a too-often-overlooked ethnic
   group."

     Bush Reaches Out jump1

   The overture to the Latino community.

   "By leaving a twenty on the table for this Mexican boy, Bush is
   telling Hispanics, 'I understand how hard your people have worked over
   the years to keep our water glasses full,'" GOP strategist Allen White
   said. "At the same time, by making this offering in tip form, he
   reinforces his campaign slogan of 'Prosperity With Purpose.' In other
   words, he sends the strong message that continued good service on the
   part of Hispanics will be recognized and rewarded."

   Despite such praise, Bush's rivals for the Republican presidential
   nomination were quick to denounce the unusually large gratuity.

   "I have always favored an across-the-board flat tip of 15 percent,
   regardless of the waiter's race," Steve Forbes said. "Gov. Bush's tip
   of 24 percent is not only fiscally irresponsible; it smacks of
   political grandstanding."

   Fellow Republican candidate John McCain was equally troubled by the
   precedent set by the Bush tip. "If we give the Hispanics 24 percent,"
   McCain said, "then the Asians will want 24 percent, too. Then the
   blacks. Then it snowballs out of control to the point where regular
   Americans suddenly can't afford to eat anywhere with table service,
   let alone get their cars detailed or their hedges trimmed. Gov. Bush
   has opened up a real Pandora's Box here."

   Speaking to reporters at a campaign stop at a tractor factory in
   Nashua, NH, Democratic presidential candidate Al Gore also had words
   for Bush.

     Bush Reaches Out jump2

   Waiter Ramon Gonzalez

   "Mr. Bush is trying to tip too little, too late," Gore said. "For
   years, he cheated the Hispanic community, calculating his tip by
   doubling the tax, even when dining in states where the restaurant tax
   is a mere six percent. Look at the record: He consistently undertipped
   Hispanics during his tenure as governor of Texas. And now he is trying
   to make up for all of that with a single $20 bill. My fellow
   Americans, I do not believe that, in his heart of hearts, Mr. Bush
   knows how much to tip."

   Gore later added that tipping should be "colorblind," reflecting only
   the quality of service received, and noted that many Hispanics are not
   waiters.

   Bush, while declining to respond specifically to his opponents'
   remarks, said he stands by his commitment to Hispanics.

   "As the fastest-growing ethnic group in America, Hispanics will
   continue to make their presence felt in all walks of restaurant life,"
   Bush said. "Whether you see them grinning while bringing the
   enchiladas at a Mexican restaurant or quietly and politely clearing
   the table at an expensive Italian eatery, I would urge all Americans
   to follow my lead and reach out to them with a couple of extra bucks."

