
   CHICAGO--In what is being called the first conceptual terrorist attack
   on American soil, the landmark Sears Tower was encased in 18 million
   tons of strawberry gelatin early Monday morning, leaving thousands
   shocked, angry, and seriously confused.
   [4]Enlarge Image Sears Tower 

   The Sears Tower

   Authorities called to the scene of the senseless attack said they
   could do little to control the large crowds of dangerously bewildered
   citizens, many of whom searched desperately for some semblance of
   meaning in what had just taken place. As of press time, 11 night
   security guards were still trapped inside the famous structure, their
   rescue unlikely until the Jell-O melts.

   "My God, it's just awful," said commuter Nick Dawson, one of countless
   Chicago residents who struggled to comprehend what had occurred. "Why
   would anyone do something like this?"

   Tentative speculation that the dessert enclosure was in fact an act of
   terrorism was quickly confirmed after a group known only as the
   Prophet's Collective took credit for the attack in a three-hour-long
   video that surfaced on the Internet.

   "Your outdated ideas of what terrorism is have been challenged," an
   unidentified, disembodied voice announces following the video's first
   45 minutes of random imagery set to minimalist techno music. "It is
   not your simple bourgeois notion of destructive explosions and
   weaponized biochemical agents. True terror lies in the futility of
   human existence."
   [5]Enlarge Image 

   The terrorists' video made their message clear.

   According to a 2007 CIA executive summary, the terrorists responsible
   for masterminding the attack are likely hiding somewhere in Berlin's
   vast labyrinth of cafés. Though officials said they didn't know if any
   of those involved in carrying out the plot were still in Chicago,
   several dozen local performance artists and interpretive dancers have
   been brought in for questioning.

   "We believe that this is the same group responsible for the 2005
   Saran-wrapping of the American embassy in Paris," CIA director Michael
   Hayden said. "This is an extremely dangerous organization with
   absolutely no regard for American tastes and sensibilities. If left
   unchecked, it could forever change the face of contemporary
   terrorism."

   Hayden said the CIA is working closely with the National Endowment for
   the Arts to cut off all grants that may serve as funding for the
   group. In addition, the Department of Homeland Security has begun
   monitoring any large purchases of gravy, tinfoil, pig's blood, and
   barbed wire in hopes of preventing another aesthetic tragedy.

   "We are calling upon all citizens to remain vigilant during this
   difficult and utterly peculiar time," Chicago mayor Richard M. Daley
   said during a press conference earlier today. "The city needs your
   help to ensure that the disturbing message sent to us by these
   terrorists today, whatever it was, never happens again."
   [6]Enlarge Image Rescue Workers 

   Shocked and slightly damp rescue workers.

   "If you see something weird, say something," Daley added.

   While officials have yet to determine the purpose of the attack, a
   number of potential theories have emerged, including the sudden
   deregulation of the U.S. economy, the destruction of culturally
   significant landmarks, and maybe the fact that man, in his essence, is
   no more than a collection of irrational fragments, incapable of
   finding reason where no reason exists.

   A secret communiqué leaked by the Prophet's Collective, however,
   decries these theories and several others as being "completely off,"
   and goes on to call the American people "cultural infidels."

   Though many Chicago residents are still attempting to wrap their heads
   around the attack, some in the Windy City have refused to classify the
   Jell-O encasement as a terrorist act at all.

   "I'm no expert, but I know terrorism when I see it," said Kathy
   Atwood, a Hyde Park mother of four. "Where is the devastating loss of
   life and massive destruction of infrastructure? This doesn't move me
   to run for my life at all."

   She added: "Real terrorism takes years of training and meticulous
   planning. My 6-year-old kid can make Jell-O."

   The DHS said it has taken additional measures to secure the Brooklyn
   Bridge following today's Jell-O attack, as initial evidence suggests
   that the New York landmark may or may not be the site of "found
   terrorism."

