
   SAN CLEMENTE, CA--Five years after settling in southern California and
   trying to blend into American society, a six-man terrorist cell
   connected to the militant Islamist organization Army of Martyrs has
   reportedly grown too complacent to conduct its suicide mission, an
   attack on the San Onofre Nuclear Generating Station.
   [4]Enlarge Image After Five Years 

   Three of the six terrorists spend an afternoon together watching an
   America's Next Top Model marathon.

   According to cell leader and boat owner Jameel al-Sharif, the
   potentially devastating operation, which involves breaching the
   station's reactor core and triggering a meltdown that could rival the
   Chernobyl disaster, "can wait."

   "We remain wholly committed to the destruction of America, the Great
   Satan," al-Sharif said. "But now is not a good time for us. The season
   finale of Lost was such a cliff- hanger that we have to at least catch
   the first episode of the new season. After that, though, death to the
   infidels."

   "Probably," added al-Sharif, who noted that his nearly $6,000 in
   credit-card debt from recent purchases of a 52-inch HDTV and a
   backyard gas grill prevents him from buying needed materials for the
   attack.

   Though the members of the cell said that they "live only to spill the
   blood of crusaders who oppress Muslims," they cited additional reasons
   for the delay, including an unexpired free Netflix trial and nagging
   lower-back pain.

   "I think I'm entitled to a little time to fully enjoy the in-dash MP3
   adapter and heads-up display that Allah, in His infinite wisdom, has
   seen fit to provide me with," munitions expert Mohammed Akram said of
   the 2006 Mercury Mariner that is intended to be used as a car bomb
   during the attack. "Also, I have nine months left on the lease. But
   after that, I am more than willing to load it with explosives and go
   to my glory in its all-leather interior and heated seats."

   Cell member Sayyid al-Tantawi, a Cairo-born former physics professor
   who was able to obtain employment at San Onofre as a reactor
   technician, once routinely worked 18-hour days so he could secretly
   obtain security codes and detailed schematics of the facility. But
   since his promotion to senior project manager last November,
   al-Tantawi has grown accustomed to perks such as higher pay, mandatory
   vacation time, delegation of responsibilities, and long lunches with
   other managers.

   "Don't get me wrong, I totally wish swift and painful death to all
   American pigs, especially that jerk [general manager] Dave [Landis],"
   al-Tantawi said. "But I'm no longer the new guy--why bust my ass all
   day long anymore? When I get home after a day at work, I don't savor
   staying up all night designing dirty-bomb triggering mechanisms like I
   did when I first got here. Sometimes I just want to pop in a CD by
   that soulful infidel Chris Daughtry and relax."

   Al-Tantawi added that due to the sedentary nature of his job, he would
   have to "lose a few pounds, Allah willing" before being able to
   fulfill his most challenging task: infiltrating the reactor's spent
   fuel storage area and draining its coolant, thereby triggering a fire
   and releasing radioactive material.

   Indeed, general preparedness appears to be the cell's greatest
   stumbling block.

   "Five a.m. is when the facility is most vulnerable to attack, when the
   morning shift security personnel replace the overnight crew," said
   Adib Dhakwan, the cell's second-in-command. "Unfortunately, Starbucks
   doesn't open until six, and I don't know about you, but if I don't
   have that first cup of coffee, forget it."

   Despite the terrorists' successful assimilation into American society,
   the FBI has been monitoring the activities of the "San Clemente Six"
   since late 2005. According to declassified intelligence documents, the
   cell's status was recently downgraded to "low risk," due in part to a
   near absence of cell phone chatter to parties other than Moviefone,
   and last month's online purchase of a hammock.

