
   GREENWOOD, IN--Sitting in a quiet downtown diner, local hospital
   administrator Philip Meyer looks as normal and well-adjusted as can
   be. Yet, there's more to this 27-year-old than first meets the eye:
   Meyer has recently finished reading a book.
   [4]Enlarge Image Eccentric 

   Even outdoors, Meyer can't seem to think of anything better to do than
   flip through some American classic.

   Yes, the whole thing.

   "It was great," said the peculiar Indiana native, who, despite owning
   a television set and having an active social life, read every single
   page of To Kill a Mockingbird by Harper Lee. "Especially the way
   things came together for Scout in the end. Very good."

   Meyer, who never once jumped ahead to see what would happen and
   avoided skimming large passages of text in search of pictures, first
   began his oddball feat a week ago. Three days later, the eccentric
   Midwesterner was still at it, completing chapter after chapter,
   seemingly of his own free will.

   "The whole thing was really engrossing," said Meyer, referring not to
   a movie, video game, or competitive sports match, but rather a
   full-length, 288-page novel filled entirely with words. "There were
   days when I had a hard time putting it down."

   Even more bizarre, Meyer is believed to have done most of his reading
   during his spare time--time when the outwardly healthy and stable
   resident could have literally been doing anything else, be it
   aimlessly surfing the Internet, taking a nap, or simply just staring
   at his bedroom wall.

   "It'd be nice to read it again at some point," Meyer continued, as if
   that were a perfectly natural thing to say.

   While it's difficult to imagine what compelled Meyer to read more than
   just the back cover of To Kill a Mockingbird, friends and family
   members claim the strange behavior goes all the way back to his
   childhood.

   "I remember when Phil was a little kid, instead of picking up a book,
   getting bored, and then throwing it at his sister, he'd actually sit
   down and read the whole thing," said mother Susan Meyer, who declared
   she has long given up trying to explain her son's unusual hobby. "At
   the time, we thought it was just a phase he was going through. I guess
   we were wrong."

   Over the years, Meyer has read dozens of books from beginning to end,
   regardless of whether he was forced to do so by a professor in school
   or whether a film version of the reading material already existed.
   According to girlfriend Jessica Kohler, he even uses a special
   cardboard marking device so that he can keep track of where he has
   stopped reading and later return to that exact same place.

   "I used to find Phil's reading kind of charming because I had never
   really met anyone who read outside of a waiting room," Kohler said.
   "But more and more, it just feels odd, you know? He can't even go to
   the beach without bringing one of his books along."

   According to behavioral psychologist Dr. Elizabeth Schulz, Meyer's
   reading of entire books is abnormal and may be indicative of a more
   serious obsession with reading.

   "Instead of just zoning out during a bus ride or spending hour after
   hour watching YouTube videos at night, Mr. Meyer, unlike most healthy
   males, looks to books for gratification," Schulz said. "Really, it's a
   classic case of deviant behavior."

   "At least, that's what it seems like from what little I've skimmed on
   the topic," she added.

   As bizarre as it may seem, Meyer isn't alone. Once a month, he and
   several other Greenwood residents reportedly gather at night not only
   to read books all the way through, but also to discuss them at length.

   "I don't know, it's like this weird 'book club' they're all a part
   of," said Brian Cummings, a longtime coworker and friend of Meyer's.
   "Seriously, what a bunch of freaks."

