
   CHICAGO--Music, a mode of creative expression consisting of sound and
   silence expressed through time, was given a 6.8 out of 10 rating in an
   review published Monday on Pitchfork Media, a well-known
   music-criticism website.
     Pitchfork Gives Logo

   According to the review, authored by Pitchfork editor in chief Ryan
   Schreiber, the popular medium that predates the written word shows
   promise but nonetheless "leaves the listener wanting more."

   "Music's first offering, an eclectic, disparate, but mostly functional
   compendium of influences from 5000 B.C. to present day, hints that
   this trend's time may not only have fully arrived, but is already on
   the wane," Schreiber wrote. "If music has any chance of keeping our
   interest, it's going to have to move beyond the same palatable but
   predictable notes, meters, melodies, tonalities, atonalities, timbres,
   and harmonies."

   Schreiber's semi-favorable review, which begins in earnest after a
   six-paragraph preamble comprising a long list of baroquely rendered,
   seemingly unrelated anecdotes peppered with obscure references,
   summarizes music as a "solid but uninspired effort."

   "Coming in at an exhausting 7,000 years long, music is weighed down by
   a few too many mid- tempo tunes, most notably 'Liebesträume No. 3 in A
   flat' by Franz Liszt and 'Closing Time' by '90s alt-rock group
   Semisonic," Schreiber wrote. "In the end, though music can be
   brilliant at times, the whole medium comes off as derivative of
   Pavement."

   While Schreiber concedes that music is still "trying to find its
   aesthetic," he also claims the form has not yet lived up to the lavish
   praise heaped on it by pop culture journalist Chuck Klosterman and
   19th-century French romantic composer and critic Hector Berlioz, among
   others.

   Schreiber concludes his critique by calling on music to develop a more
   cohesive sound in its future releases.

   "We can only hope that [music] will begin to grow with its fans over
   the next few millennia," Schreiber said. "If it can stick to what it
   does well, namely the song 'Peg' by Steely Dan, and Tuvan throat
   singing, then a sophomore effort will indeed be something to get
   excited about."

   The review has split the music community, with many decrying
   Pitchfork's lukewarm reception of music as a contrarian move designed
   to propel the publication's tastemaker status.

   "It's elitism for the sake of elitism," said Rolling Stone senior
   editor David Fricke, who refuted Pitchfork's middling rating,
   describing the entire art form as "transcendent." "I've been listening
   to music for over 30 years, and it's consistently some of the best
   stuff out there."

   Despite music's defenders, the Pitchfork review has made a deep
   impression on the thousands of music fans who slavishly follow the
   website's advice when it comes to enjoying things.

   "Music used to be great, but let's be honest, it's a 6.8 now at best,"
   said Los Angeles resident Lowell Radler, 23, who admitted that he
   just looked at the rating rather than reading the whole review. "I
   seriously might never listen to music again."

   Still, most analysts agreed that the impact of Pitchfork's scathing
   review of music will be dampened by the 2.4 rating it received from
   Pitchfork staff writer Dave Maher just moments after the initial
   critique was published online. Maher termed Schreiber's assessment of
   music "overwrought, masturbatory posturing intended to make insecure
   hipsters feel as if they're part of some imagined elite beau monde."

