
   NORTHFIELD, IL--In an effort to reach out to a segment of the
   population completely ignored by the company for more than a century,
   Kraft Foods unveiled Monday its new line of Kraft Doubles--jointly
   wrapped slices of American cheese specially designed with couples in
   mind.

   "After years of catering exclusively to depressed, lonely men in their
   30s, Kraft is proud to present a product for people who are capable of
   experiencing love and happiness," Kraft CEO Irene Rosenfeld said at a
   press conference. "No longer will couples who have a mutual craving
   for processed American cheese have to endure the hassle of unwrapping
   two individual slices."
   [4]Enlarge Image Kraft Doubles 

   Kraft's newest cheese product has mended troubled relationships.

   According to Rosenfeld, the Kraft Doubles will be packaged side by
   side in the brand's iconic twice-folded cellophane sheath. Once the
   rectangular orange product has been removed from its wrapper, lovers
   can easily separate the slices into two equal portions by carefully
   tearing along the perforated line in the center of the Double. At this
   point, it is recommended couples gingerly roll up the slices and feed
   them to each another.

   "Kraft Doubles are the perfect snack for any romantic occasion,
   including picnics in the park, moonlit strolls along the beach, and
   sexual intercourse," Rosenfeld said. "Finally, the great taste of
   Kraft American cheese and the feeling of warmth that comes from tender
   affection with another human being can be enjoyed simultaneously."

   "This Valentine's Day, give her the gift that says, 'This cheese is
   for us,'" Rosenfeld added, before assuring consumers that despite the
   new packaging, the cheese product will retain its classic cheese-like
   taste.

   Kraft reportedly decided to launch the new product after reviewing
   market research which showed that only 8 percent of its regular
   customers reported having a spouse, a significant other, any history
   of dating, or a normal and healthy social life. Marketing director
   David Merrill believes these low numbers are due to the fact that
   there has historically been only one cheese slice inside each wrapper.

   "Who wants to sit down to an elegant candlelit dinner with their
   lover, and next to the wine and the caviar see two individually
   wrapped squares of yellow cheese?" Merrill said. "When two people who
   love each other peel off the laminated-foil casing of a pasteurized
   cheese-food product, they want what's inside to reflect their
   everlasting union."

   Merrill went on to note that Kraft Doubles are best when paired with a
   light red wine such as a pinot noir.
   [5]Enlarge Image Kraft Date 

   A new ad bills Kraft Doubles as "the perfect way to tell the one you
   love you're ready for another 25 years."

   Kraft research also suggested that the small percentage of couples who
   do purchase Kraft Singles often report that the product does not
   satisfy their needs as both consumers and lovers. Kraft vice president
   Jane Hilk theorizes that, until now, every time a couple hungered for
   American cheese, they would attempt to split a Kraft Single down the
   middle, inevitably resulting in uneven cheese distribution, which in
   turn has led to arguments, domestic abuse, and, in some cases,
   divorce.

   "This is the world's first adjoined-cheese-slice product that's both
   practical and sexy," Hilk said. "Just think how many relationships
   Kraft Doubles will save."

   Hilk noted that Kraft Doubles are not strictly for couples, but also
   for single men with a big appetite and a busy schedule.

   "For the successful bachelor who hasn't had time to settle down but
   still hopes to some day, there is an added advantage," Hilk continued.
   "Should a woman he fancies ever enter his home and peer into his
   refrigerator's dairy drawer, she will know right away that he is a man
   who values commitment."

   If the new product is as popular as Kraft projects, the company plans
   to expand its line in 2009 to include the new family-sized Kraft
   Quadruples, as well as the Kraft Super-Single, which is one
   three-inch-thick slice of American cheese.

