
   SAN FRANCISCO--Traveling from as far away as park benches on the other
   side of town, hundreds of rabid temporary housing enthusiasts lined up
   overnight Friday in hopes of being among the first admitted to the
   city's newest homeless shelter.

   "I got here around 3 a.m., and already there was a crowd of people
   slumped over out front," said Jerome Ashford, a die-hard fan of having
   a roof over his head. "I had a feeling it was going to be popular, but
   this turnout--it's just insane. If I can't get in tonight, I don't
   know what I'll do."
   [4]Enlarge Image Hundreds Line 

   Mega-fans of clean bedding line up to be the first to stay in the
   shelter.

   Since last Tuesday, men and women of all ages have left the familiar
   comforts of air-conditioned bus stations and ATM lobbies to brave the
   elements outside the much-anticipated Mission District shelter. While
   most arrive with nothing more than three partially smoked cigarettes
   and a slice of bologna wrapped in a handkerchief, others have come
   fully prepared for the long wait with shopping carts full of supplies.

   "I haven't been this excited since the bakery down the street threw
   out an entire trash bag of bagels," said Lawrence Jones, who took the
   week off from collecting aluminum cans and selling his plasma to a
   nearby blood bank to wait outside the shelter. "Sure, I haven't
   showered in a public fountain in days, and I miss the warmth of my
   alleyway back home, but in the end, it'll all be worth it."

   Although the prospect of sleeping outdoors for nothing more than the
   most basic of human necessities might seem extreme to some, many in
   attendance say they've been looking forward to the shelter's grand
   opening since first reading about it beneath a blanket of newspapers.

   "I started begging for subway fare the moment I heard the news," said
   Wendy Slovic, 41, adding that there was "no way" she could wait a
   couple of weeks for the crowds to thin out. "Say whatever you want,
   but I wouldn't trade my place in line for all the scratch tickets in
   the world."

   For some, the anticipation of lying on a cot or having three meals a
   day is so great that blacking out at night has become an almost
   impossible task. Still many others, who have been eagerly counting
   down the days since fishing an old wall calendar from a dumpster, can
   hardly put their growing elation into words.

   "Where is my soul, they took my soul away," said Michael "Bone" Zahn,
   who for the last week hasn't left his place at the front of the line
   even to use the restroom. "Broken windows like spiderwebs, a stone on
   a rocking chair, rain rain rain rain--begone, you cloth demons!"

   Among the clamoring mass of refuge fanatics, the most devoted arrived
   early Sunday morning in full costume, including old shopping bags that
   had been fashioned into makeshift footwear and heavy ash-colored
   makeup covering their faces and hands. Some even carried a variety of
   creative signs with them.

   "Back when I started lining up to get into shelters, there were only
   10 or 15 of us at most," said Samuel Robins, 63, gesturing at the
   teeming crowd of shelter enthusiasts on hand. "To see how far things
   have come in the last decade alone. It's unbelievable really."

   "Many of the kids here today weren't even alive when the first shelter
   was built on this street," Robins added.

   Despite the growing excitement, a number of mega-fans who have spent
   the last week sleeping in front of the shelter, and the week before
   that sleeping behind the shelter, said they are trying to keep their
   already high expectations in check.

   "I know it probably won't live up to the picture I have in my head,
   but it's still hard not to get your hopes up," harmonica musician
   Johnnie Brooklyn, 39, said. "You want it to be amazing--for there to
   be hot food on hand, maybe even hot water--but at the same time, you
   have to be realistic about these sorts of things."

   "Man, hot water would be nice, though," Brooklyn added.

   While the mob scene in front of the shelter has caused a few minor
   disruptions, including one incident in which a passerby was asked for
   spare change 143 consecutive times, only a handful of residents have
   reacted negatively to the swelling crowds.

   "To be honest, I feel sorry for them," said Beverly Sherman, an
   administrative coordinator for Wells Fargo Bank. "To have so little in
   your life that you think nothing of camping out on the streets for
   days on end--it's depressing."

   Added Sherman: "Seriously, these people need help."

