
   LA JOLLA, CA--Since several shrewd investments in software start-ups
   pushed his net worth over the $1 billion mark last fall, Mark Stern
   has been attempting to cultivate eccentricities commensurate with his
   new wealth, the venture capitalist said Monday.
   [4]Enlarge Image New Billionaire 

   Stern prepares to fly his newly completed rocket to a movie premiere
   100 miles away in Hollywood, via the moon.

   "When you have $975 million, you're just like everyone else," said
   Stern, 41, from the bow of Excelsior, a 58-person canoe that he
   commissioned for a world-record paddle around the world. "But I'm a
   billionaire now. People expect me to use my money to feed my ego to
   the point of borderline insanity."

   The often-caped Stern, previously an affable and soft-spoken man who
   kept a relatively low public profile aside from some philanthropic
   work, said his new status forced him to rethink his legacy.

   "I was being referred to as 'California billionaire Mark Stern,' or
   simply 'billionaire Mark Stern,' and it lacked impact," the mogul
   said. "So I vowed not to rest until every mention of my name is
   prefaced with 'eccentric California billionaire.'"

   Stern added: "And just to be clear, there's no way I'm settling for
   'colorful California billionaire.'"

   Though Stern said he is "beginning to get the hang of" billionaire
   life, he admitted to a few false starts while developing his bizarre
   idiosyncrasies, citing his easygoing, essentially rational nature as a
   major obstacle.

   "I did try the Howard Hughes thing of stockpiling urine in jars and
   wearing Kleenex boxes on my feet, but it was so depressing and
   lonely," Stern said. "Plus, I realized that it's not eccentric to copy
   someone else's eccentricities."

   Stern knows he has a long way to go before realizing his long-term
   goal of transforming himself into a full-blown, self-made eccentric,
   complete with a half-baked social philosophy of his own invention and
   an extremely expensive collection of worthless art.

    After abandoning plans to live permanently in a dirigible-lofted
   mansion in the sky, Stern decided to "start over at square one."

   "I started doing stuff like recoiling from shaking people's hands,
   smelling everything I picked up, and referring to myself as 'the
   anointed one,'" Stern said. "Nothing too out-there or grandiose, just
   some basic weirdness to keep up appearances while I tried to come up
   with the really original oddities."

   "I did retain some of the more esoteric affectations, though," added
   Stern, brandishing a pure ivory cane topped with a crystal sphere
   containing a lock of his recently deceased mother's hair.

   Though he now houses five of the world's 40 remaining albino
   alligators in his custom-made lucite dining room table, Stern had
   until recently been noted for his frugal tastes.

   "Mark drove a 1999 Toyota Corolla, and he used to pride himself on
   shopping at the Men's Wearhouse even though he could afford much nicer
   things," longtime friend Thomas Bowen said. "Now he only wears
   jumpsuits made of some space-age micro- fiber paper that he
   incinerates after one use, and all I ever hear about is his hydrogen-
   powered rocket sled that he's taking to Antarctica to break the sound
   barrier or something."

   Continued Bowen: "The worst thing, though, is how he's always asking
   everybody 'Is this eccentric enough? Is that eccentric enough?' It's
   getting really annoying."

   Stern said some of his recent lifestyle changes have taken their toll
   on him. Last Thursday, his divorce from his third Ukrainian
   contortionist-performance artist wife in as many months became final.
   And La Jolla police continue to question Stern after several members
   of a cult he claims he dissolved in February were arrested on charges
   of stalking the deputy governor of California.

   "I've made a lot of sacrifices," Stern said. "Do you think I love
   sleeping nude in a hyperbaric chamber pumped with pure circulating
   oxygen, or only eating foods that are white? The sad truth is, you
   can't always do what you want when you're a billionaire."

   "That's just something I'll have to live with until my bones are
   interred in the moon's Clavius crater," Stern added.

