
   BEIJING--In an attempt to assure the world's children that the
   millions of Chinese-made toys currently being recalled for containing
   toxic lead paint and tiny choking hazards can no longer hurt them,
   high-level Chinese officials announced Tuesday that millions of
   playthings are being rounded up and immediately put to death.
   [4]Enlarge Image Chinese Authorities 

   Suspected lead- paint-tainted Barbie dolls face firing squads in
   China.

   "We are committed to the well-being of children and putting the
   consumer's mind at ease," said Chinese president Hu Jintao at a press
   conference. "Boys and girls of the world, you need not worry. Your
   toys will be executed swiftly and harshly. When we are through, there
   will be nothing left to play with."

   In the past six weeks, Mattel Inc. has recalled more than 20 million
   toys from China that are believed to contain lead paint and other
   safety defects, a situation that prompted the Chinese government to
   send People's Liberation Army forces into major industrial sectors to
   mercilessly slaughter any remaining items that have not been exported
   for sale overseas. So far, an estimated 9 to 10 million toys, from
   anonymous dolls and miniature cars to trademarked characters such as
   Thomas the Tank Engine, Curious George, and Big Bird have been
   reportedly kicked, smashed with rifles, shocked with electric batons,
   hanged, and pounded with nails, before having their ears severed and
   eyes gouged out, and then being shot.

   "Believe me when I say you can sleep peacefully tonight," said Hu, who
   reportedly gave troops direct orders to force thousands upon thousands
   of Polly Pocket dolls to their knees, point assault rifles at the
   backs of their heads, and blow their toxin-filled skulls to bits. "We
   wish to reassure the world that we are taking care of this problem. We
   shall serve the young people."

   Chinese toy manufacturers are reportedly complying with the
   government's wishes. According to the Xinhua News Agency, in the past
   three days alone, factory owners roused an estimated 365,000 Barbie
   dolls from their dream homes in a violent series of raids. During
   these raids, the Barbies were separated from their Kens, were stripped
   naked, and had their heads shaved. They were then taken to an
   undisclosed area, leaned against a wall because they were incapable of
   standing under their own power, and shot by a firing squad as toy
   soldiers were forced to watch.

   "We are assisting the authorities in destroying toys," said Chen Hai,
   a senior manager at Joy Sing Industrial Plastics Co., a supplier
   contracted by several major American toy companies. "This is not all
   talk. We invite any concerned American parents to come here and tour
   our toy torture chambers to see the toys' agony for themselves."

   Chen added that, as a precaution, the factory also executed 5,000
   workers.

   A toy-abuse-monitoring group, the Association for the Advancement of
   Plastic People (AAPP), said it has gathered evidence suggesting that
   the Chinese government has also detained an additional 20 million toys
   for questioning. According to the group, even toys that contained only
   trace levels of lead paint were loaded onto trains bound for detention
   centers in remote provinces of Western China, where they were
   allegedly deprived of sleep, burned with cigarettes, and subjected to
   traditional Chinese water torture.

   The AAPP also released video smuggled from an unidentified detention
   center showing Chinese intelligence officers attempting to extract
   information on the whereabouts of suspected lead-tainted toys from a
   Little Mommy Real Loving Baby Doll, despite the fact that she was
   capable only of asking for her bottle and playing peek-a-boo. The
   gruesome footage shows the doll's eyes being forcibly taped open and
   her lack of genitals being melted with a soldering iron.

   News of the crackdown is being received favorably by parents'
   organizations in the U.S.

   "We're pleased the Chinese government is taking such an active and
   serious approach to the safety of toys," said Annelise Bow, director
   of the Brooklyn, NY---based organization Our Children Come First. "We
   hope that in the future any potential uprisings among dangerous
   playthings coming out of China will be crushed before they can spread
   to our toyboxes."

   Minister of Commerce Bo Xilai said he hoped the mass toy-purges would
   "send a strong message to our enemies who threaten to harm us with
   their dangerous chemical compounds."

   "Only by flaying Elmo's lethal skin, and wrenching Dora the Explorer's
   deadly limbs from her sockets and publicly displaying her body parts
   can we effectively warn toys never to jeopardize the livelihood of the
   people," Bo said.

   Government officials, however, still refused to confirm the
   whereabouts of Thomas the Tank Engine, rumored to have been splintered
   into pieces by attack dogs in Manchuria. Nor would it address
   allegations that hundreds of toy steam shovels in Guangdong Province
   were forced to dig their own graves before they were executed.

