
   GAINESVILLE, FL--Although dolphins have long been celebrated for their
   high intelligence and for appearing to have a complex language, a team
   of researchers at the University of Florida reported Monday that these
   traits are markedly less evident on dry land.
   [4]Enlarge Image Study: Dolphins Not So Intelligent On Land 

   A dolphin performs poorly in a University of Florida land-based
   locomotion test.

   According to study researchers, a group of 25 bottlenose dolphins
   removed from their holding tanks failed 11 exercises designed to test
   their basic cognitive abilities and reasoning skills.

   "The dolphins were incapable of recognizing and repeating simple
   gestures," said study co-author Dr. Scott Lindell. "Their non-verbal
   communications were limited to a rapid constriction and expansion of
   the blowhole, various incomprehensible fin motions, and heavy tremors
   while they lay prone on the lab table."

   After capturing the dolphins from the ocean, Lindell and his
   colleagues tagged them and placed them under the intense, high-wattage
   lights of a moisture-proof lab. The researchers then administered an
   extensive battery of tests designed to measure everything from the
   dolphins' self-awareness to their aptitude for writing and reading
   comprehension.

   "Dolphins have a popular reputation for being excellent
   communicators," Lindell said. "But our study group offered only three
   types of response to every question we posed: a nonsensical, labored
   wheezing, an earsplitting barrage of unintelligible high-pitched
   shrieks, and in extreme cases, a shrill, distressed scream."

   Even the dolphins' proven ability to navigate through a form of sonar
   called echolocation was ineffective on land.

   "The military has claimed great success in training these mammals,
   utilizing their echolocation skills to detect mines that have been
   placed underwater," said Lindell, who conducted a similar experiment
   in a concrete parking lot. "We were unable to replicate this finding
   ourselves."

   Lindell added: "In most cases, the dolphins succeeded in finding land
   mines only when we placed them directly on top of the mines."

   In another test, several pounds of mackerel were placed on the ground,
   separated from the test dolphins by only 20 feet of concrete. The
   dolphins were unable to reach the food and feed themselves.

   Despite their failures in the initial series of tests, the animals
   were given further opportunities to demonstrate their intelligence on
   land. The dolphins were unable to display novel behaviors, use a map
   to pinpoint their location on campus (spatial reasoning), or complete
   a simple obstacle course and wall climb.

   "Their learning curve was actually negative," Lindell said. "The more
   time we gave them to complete basic land-based tests, the more pitiful
   their efforts became, with many of them opting to bask in the sun
   rather than perform a simple task."

   "In some cases," Lindell added, "the dolphins appeared to be looking
   directly into our eyes, as if pleading with us to help them perform
   better in these tests."

   Many scientists believe these findings may help to explain why
   dolphins, for all their vaunted intelligence, have never developed
   technology or agriculture, or harnessed the power of fire--skills
   still exclusively in the domain of Homo sapiens.

   Said Lindell: "Their failure is a great disappointment to all of us
   who once felt an intelligence-based kinship with these majestic
   animals."

