
   CHICAGO--Citing the sobering statistic that over 10,000 of the 12,800
   slayings in the United States in 2006 were reported by joggers, a
   national coalition of fitness enthusiasts called upon government
   officials Tuesday to impose measures that would reduce the likelihood
   of runners discovering lifeless bodies.
   [4]Enlarge Image Nation Joggers 

   Joggers at a press conference in Chicago.

   "We joggers have lives outside of finding violent-crime victims," said
   jogger Elizabeth Riccardi, who recently stumbled upon the remains of a
   double-pickax homicide  while jogging around the Bartlett Reservoir
   near Scottsdale. "We're willing to cooperate with law enforcement, but
   we don't all have the time to be consoled with a blanket and a cup of
   coffee while some cop asks us the same tedious questions."

   Riccardi said that some joggers have become so fed up with the
   dead-body encounters that they've been forced to run only on busy
   sidewalks, to the chagrin of pedestrians.

   "I don't run through Lincoln Park after 6 p.m. anymore, I steer clear
   of that alleyway by the liquor store, and I definitely do not jog by
   the river at all," Chicago resident Chaz Montgomery said. "But,
   without fail, every few months I make another gruesome,
   routine-disrupting discovery."

   "I just want a good cardiovascular workout," Montgomery added. "I
   never asked for this, not during an intense incline push or even a
   slow cooldown."
     Nation Joggers jump

   LEADING FINDERS OF CORPSES

   Sacramento-based runner Keith Stafford said the problem has gotten so
   bad for him that after he happened upon his latest body, an
   unidentified newborn girl, he considered "leaving it there under the
   park bench for someone else to find for a change."

   "Why must runners bear this burden?" Stafford said. "My brother's a
   baker, but he never opens his oven to find a severed head inside."

   To help remedy the problem, the American Joggers Association has
   proposed creating special police jogging units in major metropolitan
   areas. The units, active chiefly during the early morning and
   late-evening hours, would patrol parks, beaches, docks, vacant lots,
   factory grounds, and other common dumping sites for grisly murders.

   AJA President Nancy Staudenmeyer said that the problem now affects
   more than just recreational joggers. "[Kenyan marathoner] Evans Rutto
   would most likely have won last year's Boston Marathon had he not come
   across an execution-style murder during Mile 19, and been detained and
   questioned for over an hour," Staudenmeyer said. "And because the
   victim's hysterical mother barged in on his interrogation, Evans
   wasn't even able to finish the race."

   The AJA has created a support network for corpse-finding runners,
   establishing a toll-free hotline and holding a series of 5K "fun
   runs," all held in sealed-off, freshly cleaned, well-lit gymnasiums.
   The AJA also produced a series of print and TV public service
   announcements depicting an exasperated jogger discovering the body of
   a mutilated prostitute and immediately text-messaging his congressman.

   "The PSAs have been very effective for raising awareness,"
   Staudenmeyer said. "There were a lot of joggers out there who thought
   they were the only ones finding bodies. Once they learn they're not
   alone, we can all work together to find a solution to this major
   inconvenience."

   Still, many have given up running altogether, saying that the prospect
   of finding a naked body cut up with surgical precision has sapped
   whatever enjoyment they used to derive from the activity.

   "I wanted to find something to replace running, so I took up fishing,
   " former St. Paul, MN jogger Derek Janowitz said. "That is, until my
   canoe bumped into that floating [strangling] victim."

   "I finally just gave up and bought a Stairmaster," he added.

   Public officials have not yet addressed joggers' concerns. Some
   privately admit that having joggers find dead bodies is a more
   effective and vastly more cost-efficient crime fighting alternative
   than using local law enforcement.

