
   SAN FRANCISCO--Although Barry Bonds remains the target of criticism
   over his possible--some say almost certain--use of
   performance-enhancing substances, the fact that Bonds has not been
   implicated in dogfighting, nightclub shootings, gambling, or murdering
   his family has transformed his controversial pursuit of the all-time
   home-run record into the feel-good sports story of the summer.
   [4]Enlarge Image Bonds 

   "Until we have definitive proof one way or the other, the very
   presence of so many questions about Bonds and steroids will haunt his
   achievements forever," ESPN's Peter Gammons said Monday. "However, at
   this moment, I think we'd all have to agree that having a raging
   juiced-up misanthrope break the greatest record in sports is a ray of
   sunshine compared to everything else on the sports page."

   "What kind of person electrocutes dogs, let alone fights them?"
   Gammons added. "I simply can't comprehend it. Go, Barry!"

   While Bonds has been routinely greeted with booing and jeering
   whenever he played outside of San Francisco, the taunting seems to
   have abated for the moment as sports fans across America lapse into a
   reflective silence as Bonds approaches the plate.

   "I know Bonds is probably 100% pharmaceutical Frankenstein," said
   Brewers fan Charles Michaels, who waved a banner reading "Make Us
   Relatively Proud, Barry" while not exactly rooting against Bonds at
   Milwaukee's Miller Park Sunday night. "But I also know for a certainty
   that gambling problems didn't compel him to affect the outcome of the
   NBA playoffs. You have to give him that much."

   "Bonds is not exactly my hero," said Braves fan Bradley Hanson, who
   flew to San Francisco for Monday night's Braves game in order to
   pointedly not boo Bonds. "But he's a reminder that in these troubled
   times for sports, there are still players whose crimes are simple,
   pure, and only tarnish our beloved sport and everything it stands for
   without killing anybody."

   Bonds defiantly refuses to acknowledge, much less answer, any of the
   dozens of questions regarding his use of illegal substances, often
   lashing out at clubhouse reporters asking even innocuous
   baseball-related questions. Yet as of press time, Bonds had not yet
   been involved in even one single murder.

   "Say what you want about Bonds, but he's not a murderer, or even an
   attempted murderer," San Francisco Chronicle reporter and co-author of
   Game Of Shadows Lance Williams wrote in Sunday's edition. "The only
   thing I believe Bonds did was inject himself with Winstrol,
   Deca-Durabolin, insulin, testosterone, synthetic testosterone,
   testosterone decanoate, human growth hormones, Norbolethone,
   Trenbolone, Clomid, and possibly commercial racehorse laxatives, all
   in order to make himself a better athlete. Not to allow himself to
   gut-shoot a gentleman's club bouncer, but to become a better athlete.
   A better athlete...it doesn't seem so bad when you think about it like
   that."

   "It's a relief of sorts to see someone putting performance first,"
   Frank Deford said in a New York Times Magazine editorial Sunday. "I
   think we all believe that Barry has taken steroids, and that they made
   him into a hulking monster who rewrote the record books. But they
   didn't turn him into a hulking monster who drugged his wife and
   children into unconsciousness before strangling them to death and
   hanging himself from a weight bench. And in these troubled times,
   Bonds' performance is one we can all reluctantly applaud."

