
   AUSTIN, TX, OR NASHVILLE, TN-In one of the narrowest presidential
   votes in U.S. history, either George W. Bush or Al Gore was elected
   the 43rd president of the United States Tuesday, proclaiming the win
   "a victory for the American people and the dawn of a bold new era in
   this great nation."

   [4]Enlarge Image Bush Or Gore 

   Bush and Gore, one of whom called the election "a victory for
   America."

   "My fellow Americans," a triumphant Bush or Gore told throngs of
   jubilant, flag-waving supporters at his campaign headquarters,
   "tonight, we as a nation stand on the brink of many exciting new
   challenges. And I stand here before you to say that I am ready to meet
   those challenges."

   "The people have spoken," Bush or Gore continued, "and with their vote
   they have sent the message, loud and clear, that we are the true party
   of the people."

   With these words, the crowd of Republicans or Democrats erupted.

   Bush or Gore attributed his victory to his commitment to the issues
   that matter to ordinary, hardworking Americans. Throughout the
   campaign, the Republican or Democrat spoke out in favor of improving
   educational standards, protecting the environment, reducing crime,
   strengthening the military, cutting taxes, and reforming Social
   Security. He also took a strong pro-middle-class stand, praising
   America's working families as "the backbone of this great nation."

   "During this campaign, I had the good fortune to meet so many of you.
   And I listened to your concerns," Bush or Gore said. "And do you know
   what I found? That your concerns are the same as mine. Like
   64-year-old Rosemary Cullums of Wheeling, WV. She said to me, '[Mr.
   Bush or Mr. Gore], we need to restore a sense of values and decency to
   this country. I have three young grandchildren, and I worry about the
   filth they're exposed to on a daily basis from TV and the movies. We
   need Hollywood to take responsibility for its actions and stop
   peddling sex and violence to our young people.' I told Rosemary I
   agreed wholeheartedly and gave her my word that when I became
   president, I would demand accountability on the part of the
   entertainment industry. Would my [Democratic or Republican] opponent
   have said the same?"

   "The greatest thing a president can do is set an example for the
   people," Bush or Gore continued. "And as a devoted family man with a
   wonderful wife and [two or four] wonderful children, I promise to make
   the White House a place Americans can feel good about."

   The crowd erupted again, with thousands of delirious Republicans or
   Democrats waving signs reading, "America's Families For [Bush or
   Gore]" as a blizzard of red, white, and blue confetti fell from the
   ceiling.

   During his 30-minute victory speech, the president-elect also praised
   his campaign manager, Joe Allbaugh or Donna Brazile, for refusing to
   resort to the "negative smear tactics of my opponent."

   "Unlike my [Democratic or Republican] counterpart, my staff and I
   insisted that this election be about the issues," Bush or Gore said.
   "We refused to take the low road and stoop to dirty tricks in order to
   get elected. While [Mr. Gore or Mr. Bush] was busy with cheap innuendo
   and unfounded accusations, we were out there taking our message to the
   American people. And, judging from what happened today at the ballot
   box, you heard that message loud and clear. And I thank you."

   More confetti rained down from the ceiling, this time accompanied by
   balloons.

   Waving to acknowledge his supporters, the Ivy League graduate and
   scion of a political dynasty called for "a time of renewal and rebirth
   in America."

   "America has always been the land of promise and possibility," Bush or
   Gore said. "And never has that been more true than today. The
   opportunities that stand before us are great. The challenges are many.
   But I am energized by what lies ahead. Make no mistake, there is much
   work to be done. But we are more than up to the task. Remember that I
   am here to work for you, the people. Because you are the people who
   put me here. This is a fresh start. Our children are the future.
   America is ready for change. And new ideas. And a fresh start."

