
   WASHINGTON--In testimony before a special panel on domestic safety
   Tuesday, officials at the Central Intelligence Agency revealed that
   the U.S. may have anywhere between one and three unidentified secret
   admirers currently longing for the country.
   [4]Enlarge Image 

   President Bush contemplates whether to take truth or dare at a special
   late-night meeting with the Joint Chiefs of Staff.

   "We face a new and disturbing reality: There are people out there who
   love us, and they're coming after us," said a blushing John Michael
   McConnell, director of national intelligence. "We currently have no
   leads as to who exactly has targeted the U.S. for its affections, but
   we can be certain our admirer's feelings are real and not going away
   anytime soon. I strongly urge all Americans to be incredibly flattered
   but cautious."

   According to McConnell, the CIA received credible heart-shaped
   intelligence taped to the door of the agency's headquarters in early
   September, alerting them to an unspecified number of nations that
   might be harboring fondness for the United States. After being held to
   the chests of high-ranking CIA officials for a classified length of
   time, the note was subjected to a battery of forensic tests, as were
   the chocolates and single red rose that accompanied it. After six days
   of examination, however, analysts were unable to find a name on the
   card's pink, glittered surface.

   President Bush was reportedly informed of the situation in excited
   whispers.

   "I assure you, the full resources of your government are being
   utilized to track down any and all persons who may have special
   feelings for our great nation," McConnell said. "If this information
   were to fall into the wrong hands, it would be absolutely
   humiliating."

   Intelligence officers were able to narrow the original field of 190
   suspects to a more manageable 47, including Egypt, the European Union,
   and Antoine Martin, a 36-year-old tennis instructor from Monte Carlo.
   The agency also stepped up surveillance on Mexico and Canada, the two
   countries the CIA considers closest to the United States.
   [5]Enlarge Image 

   A CIA-generated map highlights potential hot spots of romantic
   activity from around the globe.

   "We've always had a certain, well, tension with Russia, so we asked
   our most trusted field operatives to ask their most trusted field
   operatives if they maybe liked America, but so far the country has
   proven both uncooperative and bashful," said one unnamed CIA source,
   who confirmed that all intelligence-gathering operations in the
   Scandinavian countries were terminated after it was determined they
   were "out of [the U.S.'s] league." "Then Spain told us they had
   information as to who the admirer is, but unfortunately they have been
   sworn to secrecy."

   The unnamed source added, "With our luck, it's probably Kyrgyzstan."

   At an emergency sleepover session of Congress, lawmakers passed a $750
   million appropriations bill to strengthen law enforcement presence at
   all major U.S. ports. The measure would dispatch more than 15,000
   police officers to the nation's borders to inspect any boats
   transporting large quantities of perfume or jewelry, as well as any
   barges carrying suspiciously heartfelt poetry.

   Speaker of the House Nancy Pelosi personally pledged her support in
   finding the secret admirers, offering to make multiple diplomatic
   visits to Japan to assess the country's possible involvement and
   potential interest in the upcoming Modest Mouse show.

   "Until we have more information about who we are dealing with and
   whether or not they are gross, all precautions must be taken to
   prevent a harmless crush from escalating into full-scale infatuation,"
   Pelosi said, clutching a brief compiled by aides on which she had
   drawn a heart around the words "Prime Minister Yasuo Fukuda."

   Although sources at the agency report none of the top secret,
   encrypted messages passed to visiting dignitaries have been returned
   with "yes" boxes checked, they remain hopeful they will be able to
   root out all smitten parties and avoid any potentially awkward moments
   at the United Nations.

   "I've said it all along: It's Africa," McConnell said. "They're always
   asking us for aid and inviting us to world health summits. I think
   it's pretty clear that they've been wanting to get our attention for
   some time."

