
   PONCA CITY, OK--Weird Ponca City High School freshman Sam Hollis, 14,
   briefly transcended his lifelong streak of social awkwardness
   Wednesday, surprising his classmates and teacher when he deftly
   dissected a frog during his second-period biology lab.

   Displaying a never-before-witnessed confidence and poise, Hollis
   effortlessly handled a surgical scalpel and a pair of forceps. After
   making a clean lengthwise incision in the preserved frog's abdomen, he
   used the forceps to skillfully pull aside the layers of skin and
   muscle.
   [4]Enlarge Image Weird Kid 

   Sam Hollis, who is small for his age, takes a moment to reflect on the
   only instance of easy social interaction in his 14 years of life.

   Hollis reportedly completed the opening of the body cavity in less
   than one minute, which drew the attention of nearby pairs of students
   still arguing over who would have to touch their frog and gagging from
   the stench of formaldehyde.

   "At first I thought he was going to be all weird and start to cry or
   something," said Hollis' assigned lab partner Ricky Malnight, who
   before knew Hollis only as "that dork who never talks and has
   dandruff." "But he just picked up the scalpel and dove right in. He
   didn't even look at the workbook or anything. It was pretty awesome
   because all I had to do was sit there while he did everything."

   Hollis appeared so in his element, Malnight said, that for the rest of
   the class period he almost forgot the scrawny teen's faintly musty
   odor, perennially crooked glasses, and widely agreed-upon "gross"
   status.

   As students craned their necks to watch him assuredly navigate the
   frog's abdominal cavity, Hollis capitalized on his fleeting peer
   acceptance by identifying the functions of all seven major organs. He
   even showed his classmates how to cut out the gall bladder without
   damaging the liver, a skill which earned many extra credit on the
   project.
     Natalie Kranz

"Steve [Sam] was a big help."

   Natalie Kranz
   President, Student Council

   Hollis also blazed a trail in stomach cutting, the most dreaded part
   of the project, in which students examined the semi- digested remains
   of the euthanized frogs' last meals.

   "That weird science kid totally knew what he was doing," fellow
   biology student Mike Warner said. "He's still a loser, but it was
   pretty cool when he showed us where the frog's balls were."

   Added Warner: "Courtney Olsen screamed like crazy when I pretended to
   throw mine at her."

   By the end of class, the weird teen had managed to speak to six
   different classmates for a combined 17 minutes of flop sweat-free
   conversation.

   "My mom's French, so I've actually eaten frog legs before," Hollis
   said. Miraculously, his comment failed to gross out or otherwise repel
   the majority of students.

   Hollis then began moving the dissected frog's mouth, making the
   lifeless creature plead not to be eaten, which earned Hollis a few
   halfhearted chuckles from nearby classmates for the first time in his
   life.

   Perhaps the most surprising event came when student council president
   Natalie Kranz asked Hollis where the elusive spleen was located. The
   resulting 30-second exchange with the most popular girl in school
   marked the longest period of communication with a female peer in
   Hollis' life, as well as the only known occurrence of direct eye
   contact.

   "Yeah, Steve [Sam] was a big help," Kranz said regarding the event
   Hollis will replay over and over in his mind for the next several
   years. "I really need good grades in this class or my parents aren't
   going to let me go to prom with Josh [Mueller]."

   According to those who have sort of known Hollis since elementary
   school, the classroom dissection was by far his most successful foray
   into normal social interactions. Past failed attempts include breaking
   his collarbone in third grade during a game of tag, and a poorly
   attended Battlestar Galactica-themed birthday party.

   Hollis, however, seemed optimistic about the possibilities of entering
   a new phase in his social life.

   "I really wish we were working on fetal pigs," said Hollis after
   turning in his tray and scalpel and offering to stay after class to
   gather and dispose of the gutted frogs. "It would be really
   interesting to cut open one of their hearts, because they're pretty
   similar to the human heart in a lot of ways."

   "[Hollis] said that?" Malnight asked upon hearing of his lab partner's
   continued interest in animal dissection. "What a fucking freak."

