   Isiah Thomas

   NEW YORK--A meeting held at Madison Square Garden Wednesday between
   New York Knicks ownership and head coach Isiah Thomas was interrupted
   more than half a dozen times by "Fire Isiah" chants which came at
   various points throughout the two-hour-long discussion, Knicks
   officials reported.

   The mocking chants--which sources speculate were inspired by Thomas'
   conviction for sexual harassment, his lax punishment of guard Stephon
   Marbury for abandoning the team last week, and the consistent failure
   of an overpaid roster that Thomas himself is responsible for
   recruiting--could be overheard from outside the boardroom's entrance,
   and were regularly followed by five claps: two slower ones followed by
   three in rapid succession.

   "Fire I-si-ah!" board members shouted in unison as Thomas reportedly
   tried to explain that his team was, in fact, making incremental but
   tangible progress. "Fire I-si-ah!"

   According to Madison Square Garden L.P.'s Vice Chairman Hank Ratner,
   the meeting started on an icy note when administrative assistant
   Sheryl Jones opened the conference room doors and announced Thomas'
   name, inspiring the entire room to erupt into a chorus of loud boos
   that lasted for nearly one minute.

   Ratner said the boos were immediately followed by what was in fact the
   second "Fire Isiah" chant, the first of which began when Thomas called
   to inform the Knicks front office that he would be five minutes late
   for the meeting.

   "If you would have asked me four years ago if Isiah Thomas would be
   booed mercilessly every time he took the floor in his home office, I
   would have said you were nuts," Knicks primary owner James Dolan said.
   "Now? I wouldn't be shocked if this happens every work day."

   Even when the chants subsided, Dolan said, Thomas still experienced
   other forms of hostility from all 15 board members in attendance,
   including multiple rounds of sarcastic clapping when Thomas talked
   optimistically about his team's four wins, several thrown C-cell
   batteries that narrowly missed Thomas' head, and intermittent shouts
   of "You suck," "My 5-year-old daughter could do a better coaching
   job," and "Die."

   Ratner stated that, as Thomas continued to speak concerning the
   Knicks' chances to secure one of the eight playoff spots in the NBA's
   Eastern Conference, many at the meeting used the "thunder sticks" they
   received for free at the offices' front entrance in an apparent
   attempt to distract Thomas from his train of thought.

   In addition, when Thomas defended his coaching strategy and failed to
   offer any suggestions as to how he could immediately make the Knicks a
   better basketball team, frustrated board members began a
   30-second-long "asshole" chant.

   Those board members too upset and flabbergasted to shout any
   obscenities reportedly buried their faces in their hands, slouched
   back in their leather chairs, sighed, and repeated "God, we suck" in
   defeated tones.

   Though Thomas' expression remained stoic throughout the meeting, New
   York Rangers general manager Glen Sather said Thomas appeared slightly
   fazed when the president of MSG Sports Steve Mills walked in carrying
   an Isiah Thomas effigy he made at home prior to the meeting.

   "[The effigy] had a noose tied around its neck," said Sather, adding
   that the doll was dressed in a white collared shirt that had "Devil"
   written across its chest. "You could tell that Isiah saw it out of the
   corner of his eye, and when Steve hung it from the office ceiling,
   Isiah's voice briefly cracked. But, he managed to keep it together,
   telling us that all the team needed was a little more time to gel, and
   that the players hadn't been given a chance to get into a real rhythm
   yet."

   "That's the type of cool you need to be a successful coach in New
   York," Sather said. "I mean, you'd think so, anyway. Right?"

   When the meeting ultimately let out, Thomas experienced further
   harassment from upper management during the post-meeting press
   conference.

   "This comes with the territory of being a part of a professional
   sports team in New York City," Thomas said as Dolan, who was
   reportedly drunk during the entire second half of the meeting, exposed
   his backside to the coach and all media present. "You just have to
   block it all out."

   Dolan later apologized to Thomas for his childish actions and assured
   him his job was safe.

