
   ALDERWINE, MO--Cracker Barrel CEO Michael Woodhouse announced Tuesday
   that the restaurant and retail chain would expand to a new location
   out by Highway 18, near the Harmon Road turnoff.
   [4]Enlarge Image Cracker Barrel Sign 

   The sign for the Cracker Barrel down by the ball fields

   "At Cracker Barrel, our mission is to give our customers hearty,
   all-American food and old license plates on the walls to look at while
   they eat," said Woodhouse, gesturing toward a scale model of the
   future restaurant, which is the same model used for all new location
   announcements. "That's why we're proud to announce our newest
   location, just up a ways past the Flying J."

   The new location will be the fourth Cracker Barrel in town, fifth if
   you count the one half a mile from the city limits where the dirt
   track speedway used to be.

   The decision to build one, Woodhouse said, was based on months of
   extensive internal research indicating that people around here like to
   eat, like to drive, and are willing to drive to eat.

   "Our data showed that folks driving north out of town might like a
   Cracker Barrel in the immediate area," Woodhouse said. "I always said
   there should be one out that way anyhow, so no matter which direction
   you're heading out, you can always stop at a Cracker Barrel."

   The new restaurant puts Cracker Barrel on track to outpace its chief
   rival, Bob Evans, which has only three locations in the whole county.
   While some have expressed concern that the increased traffic
   congestion may pose a problem for people on their way to church or the
   Winn-Dixie, reaction to the news has been largely positive.
   [5]Enlarge Image cracker map 

   "New Cracker Barrel, huh?" motorist Marlon Wentz said. "Well, all
   right."

   This newest Cracker Barrel will offer the chain's signature cuisine of
   fried chicken, biscuits and gravy, and grits, as well as its usual
   rustic, old-timey decor, replete with big jars of penny candy and
   merchandise such as ceramic chickens, berry-scented candles, teddy
   bears wearing American flag sweatshirts, and wooden-peg "IQ tests."
   The waitstaff will be comprised almost exclusively of matronly
   Caucasian females who pepper their conversation with the word
   "darlin'."

   "The down-home cooking, the Americana-themed souvenirs--Cracker
   Barrel's all about preserving a special way of life," Woodhouse said.
   "Plus, we got a gross of these salt and pepper shakers shaped like
   silos, and they need to go somewhere."

   Woodhouse also revealed that the location would have its own "real
   tall sign that lights up, so you won't be able to miss it if you try."

   "We'll be listed on those gas-food-lodging exit signs on the highway
   too," Woodhouse said. "You know, the ones that tell you if gas, food,
   or lodging is nearby."

   The restaurant is scheduled to be open for business in approximately
   three months. Ground-breaking will begin next Wednesday, and
   construction will be handled by the fellows who do pretty much all the
   building around here.

   Woodhouse confirmed that Cracker Barrel is considering opening
   additional locations in the near future, like one near where the Black
   Cat fireworks stand is now, and another down by that speed trap that
   gets people if they aren't careful.

   "We got a good thing going here," said Woodhouse, leaning back in his
   rocking chair. "Can't see why we shouldn't just keep on keeping on
   with it."

