
   NEW YORK--Hoping to replicate the success of the Emmy-winning NBC show
   The Office, executives at CBS announced Monday that the network will
   adapt the highly rated comedy for CBS audiences.
   [4]Enlarge Image CBS Announces 

   David Spade has big, Steve Carell-sized shoes to fill, but he and CBS
   executives think he's up to the task.

   "We're excited to bring the fresh, groundbreaking comedy of The Office
   to a completely new channel," CBS President Leslie Moonves said. "Some
   people say a show like The Office can only work on NBC, but we're out
   to prove them wrong."

   Since securing rights to the sitcom, producers Bruce Klein and Greg
   Winston have worked diligently to repackage the show for its new
   context.

   "We're huge fans of NBC's The Office--we want to remain faithful to
   that while at the same time creating our own voice," Klein said.
   "Obviously we had to change some of the language and cultural
   references to things our audience will understand. But the show's
   central message is the same: Just because they call it 'work' doesn't
   mean you can't have a few laughs while doing it."

   The show's pilot, a shot-for-shot re-creation of NBC's Office pilot,
   features comedian David Spade as boss Peter Craig, the fun-loving and
   inspirational boss of a small-town Ohio paper company.

   "Having David on the project is such a thrill," said Klein, who
   offered Spade the part after Ray Romano and Kevin James turned down
   the role. "Don't get me wrong--Steve Carell is great, but David's
   combination of zippy one-liners and all-out zaniness just can't be
   beat."

   The remake will also feature the same will-they-won't-they love story
   between a plain-looking receptionist engaged to a man from the
   company's warehouse who doesn't appreciate her, and a perfectly suited
   coworker who pines for her from afar. But producers at CBS said the
   love triangle will be "completely revamped" for the new series, as new
   names have been created for all three characters.
   [5]Enlarge Image CBS Pam Jim 

The New Pam And Jim

   Jen and Tom's steamy office romance, which "doesn't remain unfulfilled
   for too long," will be the foundation of the show, says director
   Howard Gatson.

   "The budding romance between Jen and Tom is really the foundation of
   the show," said director Howard Gatson, who has made their connection
   "more believable" by casting more traditionally attractive actors in
   the roles. "People are going to tune in every week to see if Jen will
   ever leave her fiancé to be with Tom. And they'll be so relieved when
   she finally does in episode three."

   The producers made several other changes to the show in order to
   promote a greater crossover appeal. The faux-documentary format has
   been dropped in favor of a traditional three-camera setup, and a laugh
   track has been added to fill in any painful, awkward pauses in
   dialogue that might slow down the show.

   "We're very excited about the ripped-from-the-headlines feel of
   [assistant to the manager] Dwayne's backstory as an Iraq War veteran,"
   Klein said. "It will give his character some of the authority and
   gravity that [NBC's] Dwight is lacking."

   Fans of the original NBC version and several TV critics have expressed
   doubt as to whether the show's dry, subtle humor can be interpreted
   for an entirely different channel.

   "These NBC imports have failed time and time again to make the leap to
   other networks," Washington Post entertainment reporter Deborah Landon
   wrote. "Just look what happened when CBS tried to adapt the failed
   half season of NBC's Coupling."

    "You can't just take a show that good, throw in a new set of actors,
   and expect the same results," said Jennie Tan, who runs a popular
   fansite for the NBC show. "CBS just has to accept that there will
   simply never be another character like Michael Scott, ever."

   Despite early public skepticism, CBS executives remain confident the
   program will be a cross-network hit. They have already commissioned
   two 12-episode seasons of the reworked sitcom, tentatively titled The
   Office, and slotted the show for their most competitive time slot,
   Thursdays at 8:30 p.m.

   "We're not afraid to put our version of The Office against the most
   popular shows out there," Moonves said. "It's something totally unique
   and different, and frankly, there's nothing else like it on CBS."

