   NFL Meteorologists

   NEW YORK--Steaming black-guy heads, the traditional sign of
   approaching winter for generations of football fans, have been
   occurring later in the season with every passing year, a fact that may
   be evidence of a climatic change with long-term effects on football
   itself, top scientists in the meteorological department of the
   National Football League said in a study released Monday.

   "The phenomenon of weather-related African-American supracranial
   vaporous emission, or 'Steaming Black-Guy Heads,' as it is
   colloquially known, occurs when cold dry winter  air comes into
   contact with hot, humid, shaven heads of football players, causing
   their personal water vapor to condense and rise on a column of heated
   air," the statement read in part. "It is then observed by network
   cameramen, who overwhelmingly choose to film African-American players
   due to the dramatic contrasts that result--especially when the player
   in question is backlit--and beamed to millions of households during
   time-outs, replay reviews, and other stoppages of play. The viewers
   then realize that winter has come to America."

   "However, film review reveals that steaming black-guy heads, which
   during the 1970s were commonplace in mid-September, have in recent
   years not been sighted until the weeks after Thanksgiving," the
   statement continued. "Although further study is definitely called for,
   we conclude that the pronounced trend for steaming black-guy heads to
   occur progressively later every year--coupled with the phenomenon of
   giant triangles of ass-sweat persisting well into November--is a
   possible indication of a slowly warming climate across the entire
   NFL."

   League commissioner Roger Goodell was not available for comment,
   saying that, although early-season instances of steaming black-guy
   heads were obviously preferable, the NFL had no official stance on
   climate change, global warming, or other meteorological phenomena that
   did not directly affect the scheduling or outcome of games.

   Reaction among coaches and players has been mixed.

   "When I came into the league with Tampa Bay, steaming black-guy heads
   were everywhere in October," said longtime NFL veteran and current
   Carolina Panthers quarterback Vinny Testaverde. "The Bucs were in the
   NFC Central back then, and we played in Chicago and Green Bay a lot,
   and to me, they always meant Halloween was coming. But these days, the
   rookies think of them as the first sign of Christmas. You can't tell
   me that's not global warming."

   "Early on in my career, I saw them a lot, even in September," said
   Packers quarterback Brett Favre, who still has fond memories of the
   steaming heads of such Packer greats as Sterling Sharpe, LeRoy Butler,
   and Reggie White. "But this year we only started getting them just
   this week, and it's December already. Listen, I don't know anything
   about climate change, but I'd hate to see my daughters grow up in a
   world where steaming black-guy heads are just something you see on
   ESPN Classic."

   NFL climatologist Lee Orfordson, one of the authors of the report,
   advised caution among those worried about the dwindling instances of
   steaming black-guy heads around the league.

   "Remember that there are more domed stadiums now, that Northern-tier
   teams are being scheduled for more away games in Southern-tier cities
   during the winter months, and above all, that steaming black-guy heads
   are a single, if dramatic, phenomenon," Orfordson said. "There are
   plenty of numbers still to crunch here before we can say the steaming
   black-guy head has gone the way of the dodo."

   Still, for generations of fans for whom steaming black-guy heads were
   an important symbol of seasonal change, the announcement has inspired
   a definite feeling of foreboding.

   "I was the very first of the steaming black-guy heads," said former
   Raider defensive end Otis "The Grandfather Of All Steaming Black-Guy
   Heads" Sistrunk, whose own vigorously steaming head was noted by ABC
   color man Alex Karras in the early autumn of 1974 and began a
   winter-onset sideline-camera tradition that continues to this day.
   "And I'm very, very proud of that. I just hope I don't live to see the
   last."

