
   SAN FRANCISCO--A sellout crowd rose to its feet and exploded into
   ecstatic cheers Tuesday night as Barry Bonds completed the downfall of
   America's most revered sport by hitting a thundering 435-foot shot
   into the right center field bleachers for career home run No. 756 and
   tainting baseball's most beloved record.
   [4]Enlarge Image Barry Bonds 

   Celebrations broke out throughout AT&T Park and thousands of
   flashbulbs went off as Bonds took his ceremonial trip around the
   bases, his arms raised in a jubilant gesture of triumph as he
   completed his desecration of baseball. Fireworks filled the night sky
   to mark the utter destruction of the national pastime, a scramble for
   the infamous baseball broke out in the stands, and the game was
   interrupted for 10 minutes in the bottom of the fifth to mark the
   shameful occasion.

   Mike Bacsik, the pitcher who made the difficult and admirable decision
   to pitch to Bonds as if he were a normal player, and who will forever
   be known as the man whose fastball was sent out of the park along with
   the last remnant of baseball's self-respect, could only watch. Bonds
   would later present Bacsik with an autographed bat.

   Moments after Bonds crossed home plate into the loving arms of his
   family and the eventual judgment of history, he addressed the fans,
   thanking them for their support on his long, hard road of perverting
   baseball.

   "Thank you very much. I got to thank all of you, all the fans here in
   San Francisco. It's been fantastic," he said to his deluded and
   complicit home crowd as his godfather Willie Mays, a fading symbol of
   what baseball once was, stood at his side.

   As soon as Bonds completed his self-congratulation, a self-conscious
   gasp could be heard as a videotaped message from Hank Aaron was played
   over the video screen, sending surprise and a fleeting moment of
   uncomfortable self-awareness through both the crowd and Bonds himself.

   "Throughout the past century, the home run has held a special place in
   baseball and I have been privileged to hold this record for 33 of
   those years," said Aaron, whose legacy of persevering with profound
   personal dignity through racism and persecution to become the all-time
   home run leader will hopefully not be tarnished by public
   acknowledgment of Bonds.

   "I move over now and offer my best wishes to Barry and his family on
   this historic achievement," Aaron concluded, displaying infinitely
   more grace than Bonds, baseball fans, and perhaps even baseball itself
   had any right to ask of him.

   Bonds then presented his helmet, gloves, and bat to a steward of the
   Baseball Hall of Fame for shipment to Cooperstown, where they will be
   enshrined forever, allowing fathers and sons to come and stare at them
   glumly as they bear mute witness to baseball's diminished glory.

   The Nationals won the game, 8-6.

