
   NEW YORK--Academy Award-winning director Oliver Stone said Monday that
   his new film World Trade Center unveils "compelling and controversial"
   new evidence that a single plane was responsible for all four
   collisions in New York, Washington, D.C., and Pennsylvania on Sept.
   11, 2001.
   [4]Enlarge Image Oliver Stone Jump Movie Sti 

   "There's no way anyone can ever deny there was only one plane."

   "Get ready to go through the looking glass here, people," Stone told
   reporters at a Manhattan press conference before an advance screening
   of the movie, which premieres Wednesday. "The film you are about to
   see is going to blow the lid off the 9/11 Commission's official report
   and expose a conspiracy that reaches the highest levels of
   government."

   World Trade Center, which stars Nicolas Cage as a dedicated Port
   Authority officer who stumbles on secret evidence amid the rubble and
   carnage of the terrorist attack, tells a story quite different from
   what Stone called "the official government line" about the event.
   According to the film, at 8:46 a.m., a lone commercial airliner flew
   diagonally through the North Tower of the World Trade Center,
   maintained a circular holding pattern for approximately 17 minutes,
   then struck the South Tower before heading to the Pentagon.
     Oliver Stone

   Stone

   After its collision with the center of American military operations,
   the so-called "magic plane"--which variously and ingeniously
   identified itself to air-traffic controllers as "American Airlines
   Flight 11," "United Airlines Flight 175," "American Airlines Flight
   77" and "United Airlines Flight 93"--took to the skies once again,
   landing at a top-secret "black-ops" Air Force base in West Virginia,
   where it was reloaded with a group of clones from another shadowy
   government program that Stone described as "shocking."

   Stone, who said he did not have time to explore the clone angle in the
   three-and-a-half-hour film, plans to do so in the sequel, September
   12.

   In a gripping sequence, undercover agents transmit pre-recorded
   cell-phone messages intended to fool loved ones and relatives with a
   false cover story as the aircraft heads to its final, prearranged
   crash site in the fields of southwestern Pennsylvania.
   [5]Enlarge Image Oliver Stone's Jump Map R 

   Viewers of the advance screening agreed that the most striking and
   pivotal scene was Cage's character's discovery of security-camera
   footage that affirmed the single-plane theory. Showing his skeptical
   but supportive wife the footage frame by frame, Cage notices that the
   so-called "first" plane, which, according to official, whitewashed
   reports, detonated upon impact with the North Tower in the initial
   collision, actually banks "back and to the left, circling for about 17
   minutes, and then diving into the other tower." He repeats the phrase
   over and over in increasing intensity, toggling back and forth between
   individual frames while the music swells and the emotional drama rises
   to a fever pitch.

   "After seeing that sequence, there's no way anyone can ever deny again
   that there was only one plane in the airspace over the eastern
   seaboard that morning," Stone said.

   "I am the most important filmmaker working today," he added.

   Early public reaction to the film has been skeptical. Many 9/11
   conspiracy theorists claim Stone is presenting an exploitative,
   far-fetched, and manipulative Hollywood version of the pain and
   suffering--including eye strain and carpal tunnel syndrome--they have
   undergone during their countless hours on the Internet in the
   tragedy's aftermath.

   Despite the controversy, Stone stands by his film. "This is a story
   that needs to be told, in a reality that only I can bring to the big
   screen," Stone said. "I realize it will be hard to accept for those
   unable to confront the truth, but I can't hide my head in the sand
   like some goddamn ostrich. To sin by silence when we should protest
   makes cowards out of men."

