
   BOSTON--According to a report released Monday by Boston University's
   School of Lifestyle Management, more than 180 trillion leisure hours
   were lost to work in 2004.

   [4]Enlarge Image 180 Trillion Leisure Hours Lost To Work In 2004 

   A Detroit resident spends valuable leisure hours at an auto plant.

   "The majority of American adults find work cutting into the middle of
   their days--exactly when leisure is most effective," said Adam
   Bernhardt, the Boston University sociology professor who headed the
   study. "The hours between 9 a.m. and 6 p.m. are ideally suited to
   browsing stores, dozing in front of the television, and finishing the
   morning paper. Daytime hours are also the warmest and sunniest of the
   day, making them perfect for outdoor activities. Unfortunately, most
   Americans can't enjoy leisure during this time, for the simple reason
   that they're 'at work.'"

   In addition to surveying 12,000 citizens nationwide, researchers
   studied data from seven different government agencies.

   Deborah Kletter, an expert in the field of rest and relaxation,
   emphasized the pervasive nature of the problem, which she said affects
   96 percent of employable Americans year-round.

   "Week after week of potential relaxation time is squandered to jobs,
   with millions of would-be leisurers prohibited from sleeping in,
   working on hobbies, or taking trips," said Kletter, executive director
   of the Five-To-Nine Foundation. "An average employed person's ability
   to stroll aimlessly around his town and 'do whatever' is basically
   nonexistent 49 weeks out of the year."

   Kletter said there is a vast disparity between the U.S. and Europe,
   where a strong leisure ethic is taught during youth.

   "Americans simply can't keep up with the European leisure force,"
   Kletter said. "In such fields as suntanning, skiing, and cooking
   elaborate meals that can be eaten over the course of an entire
   evening, Europe has us beat."

   The report's internals reveal that full-time workers are hit hardest,
   with part-time workers coming in a close second, and freelancers
   marking a distant third.

   [5]Enlarge Image 180 Trillion Leisure Hours Lost To Work In 2004 jump 

   A group of friends enjoy some rare leisure hours in Sunnyvale, CA.

   "Ironically, the unemployed fared the best in this report," Kletter
   said. "One of the questions that remains unanswered, unfortunately, is
   how jobless citizens' high number of available leisure hours somehow
   fails to translate into overall happiness."

   Bernhardt and Kletter found that employed persons do find one small
   but regular opportunity for leisure.

   "In general, Saturdays and Sundays were unaffected by work," Kletter
   said. "Unfortunately, this fact does little more than underscore the
   fact that a serious problem exists five out of seven days of the
   week."

   The loss of leisure-related revenue is another factor to consider,
   Kletter said.

   "Leisure-time reduction is costing America billions of dollars in
   weekday concert-ticket revenue, airfare, and violin lessons," Kletter
   said. "I don't understand why the government hasn't already stepped
   in."

   Kletter said that, "on the bright side," many Americans have learned
   to reclaim leisure time through aggressive multi-tasking.

   "Americans have an impressive ability to do several things at once,"
   said Kletter, who compiled the at-office leisure figures.
   "Enterprising workers managed to shop online, have long-distance
   telephone conversations with friends, and stare at their cubicle walls
   for hours. Those findings are very encouraging."

   Bernhardt and Kletter acknowledged that their report was responsible
   for the loss of nearly 2,000 leisure hours.

