
   TEMPE, AZ--Calling his pet "a  completely different gerbil" than the
   one he brought home from the store, Doug Kerlin, 34, told reporters
   Tuesday that he fears the small mammal is growing increasingly
   distant.
   [4]Enlarge Image Doug Kerlin 

   Kerlin, 34, and Blinkers, 0.5, sometimes go days without making eye
   contact.

   "When I first got Blinkers, it was like we had this amazing
   connection," said Kerlin, who aside from his gerbil lives by himself
   in a one-bedroom apartment. "But lately it's almost as if he cares
   more about burrowing in his wood chips than he does about me."

   Despite recent attempts by Kerlin to bridge the ever-growing void
   between himself and the withdrawn rodent--primarily by placing several
   new wooden ramps and ladders inside Blinkers' 15-gallon aquarium--as
   of press time the gerbil had refused to emerge from his nesting box.

   "I don't know what to do," said Kerlin, who claimed the gerbil barely
   acknowledges his presence when he comes home from work. "Sometimes
   it's like he doesn't even recognize me."

   According to Kerlin, the eight-inch, 2.3-ounce Mongolian gerbil's
   aloof behavior started when the junior accountant noticed that
   Blinkers would avoid looking at him every time he stared into the
   rodent's cage. The emotional detachment only became more apparent,
   Kerlin said, when Blinkers started making rhythmic thumping sounds
   with his hind legs every time Kerlin would reach into the glass
   enclosure to hold the gerbil.

   "I was concerned," said Kerlin, who purchased the pet on a whim when
   he was walking through a shopping mall last Saturday night. "But the
   veterinarian told me that there was nothing medically wrong with
   Blinkers. That's when I knew it was me."

   Though Kerlin has tried to personally engage his despondent gerbil by
   giving him more dust baths and leaving a cleaned-out coconut shell on
   the aquarium floor, Blinkers became even more cold and unfeeling with
   every conciliatory gesture, opting to ignore his owner for hours at a
   time by roaming around his multicolored climbing tunnel.

   "Sometimes I come downstairs in the middle of the night to get a
   snack, and I hear him running on the exercise wheel and rustling
   around in his cage," Kerlin said. "But as soon as I turn on the light,
   he suddenly stops and waits for me to leave the kitchen."

   Kerlin said the last real emotional response he received from the
   gerbil was several nights ago when he left a toilet paper tube in the
   aquarium for Blinkers to play with.

   "The next morning it was completely destroyed," Kerlin said.

   Searching for some kind of reason to justify his gerbil's callous
   behavior, Kerlin admitted that he probably doesn't clean out the
   rodent's dwelling as often as he could. He still contends, however,
   that he has never done anything physically harmful to Blinkers that
   would warrant such a coldhearted response from the rodent.

   "I never once picked him up by his tail, and always made sure his
   sipper bottle was full of fresh water," Kerlin said. "Also, I used to
   give him lettuce or seeds as an occasional treat. How dare he act like
   I'm a complete stranger?"

   "I didn't buy a gerbil to be treated like this," he said.

   Following a last-ditch attempt to win over his pet's appreciation by
   introducing a companion gerbil, an idea that reportedly backfired
   completely, Kerlin flatly stated that Blinkers has distanced himself
   to a point where the once-loyal pet is mentally and emotionally
   "gone," and a "mere shell of the gerbil he once was."

   Still, Kerlin said he would always remember the good times.

   "I remember when I used to come home and watch Blinkers chew through
   old cardboard, squeaky toys, file folders, wood chips, plastic tubing,
   Kleenex boxes, Styrofoam cups--anything he could get into his mouth,
   really," Kerlin said. "He just loved to chew. He still does, but it's
   just different now, you know?"

   Added Kerlin: "I probably should have gotten a hamster instead."

