
   CHICAGO--Residents of the Carney Gardens neighborhood on Chicago's
   South Side are opposing an effort by asshole real-estate developer
   Royce Messner to build a godawful $45 million strip mall and
   condominium complex in the crime-ridden shithole they call home.
   [4]Enlarge Image Shitty Neighborhood Protest 

   Residents march to protect their beloved, execrable squalor.

   The Save Carney Neighborhood Foundation, the most organized
   non-criminal group in this part of town, has filed a lawsuit in
   federal court to block the scheduled April 2008 groundbreaking. While
   halting the project would surely prevent a tragic urban-planning
   nightmare, it would also mean keeping the run-down, economically
   depressed community exactly as it is.

   "Carney is where I was born and raised, and  it remains a tight-knit
   community," said Foundation chairman Althea Hynes at a fundraising
   block party held Monday on a broken bottle- and condom-strewn stretch
   of Carney Avenue where the money-grubbing Messner wants to put a
   soulless indoor food court. "Lots of young kids still play in the
   empty lots around here."

   Messner, 54, a three-time Chicagoland "Builder of the Year" and
   all-time unbelievable scumbag who made his fortune in the 1990s
   converting public parks and cheap, blighted properties into high-rise
   luxury residences, is seeking to "revitalize" Carney Gardens by razing
   it and replacing it  with a damned cookie-cutter mixed
   commercial-residential development that would benefit no one who lives
   there now.
     Shitty Neighborhood Develop

   Unrepentant prick Messner.

   "What people like this can never get through their heads is the fact
   that progress isn't always painless," the rapacious bastard said, as
   if he were not talking about driving thousands of poor benighted fucks
   out of the place that, pestilential hellhole or not, is the only home
   they've ever been able to afford. "They complained about the
   expressway over their heads too, but its easy-on, easy-off access
   makes Carney Gardens a prime area for development. Once we get a few
   more chain restaurants in that area, the whole economy will turn
   around."

   A hellish 16-block stretch of burned-out buildings and howling
   poverty, Carney Gardens has never recovered from its economic  slide
   in the late 1960s. However, many of those who live in the human sewer
   say they can't just allow Messner to squat his bloated fat-cat ass
   over their neighborhood and dump a big concrete-and-glass yuppie turd
   onto everything they've ever known.

   "There's no way this city can allow some developer to just come in
   here and ruin our community," said liquor store owner Carlos Jimenez,
   demonstrating willful ignorance of Chicago history, the conditions
   immediately outside his door, and even his role in Carney Gardens'
   downfall.

   "Where are all these people supposed to go if they put up that mall
   here--Gary, Indiana?" said Hynes, as if living in a filthy, dangerous
   joke of a city was some kind of affront to her standards.

   Urban planning experts say that any opposition to the colossal asshole
   faces an uphill battle, as Carney Gardens has been a wart on the ass
   of Chicago for too long. Despite this, it seems that the determined
   Save Carney group will not abandon its hope of rejecting the only
   development proposal their hopeless pit will see in the next two
   decades.

   "Poor communities are at a disadvantage against this type of
   developer, who speaks the language of City Hall," said Jackson
   Eisenberg, an architecture professor at Loyola University who has
   studied the effects of short-sighted, profit-oriented renewal and
   gentrification on dozens of crap areas. "It's the same dilemma faced
   by the working-class [losers] in [rotten-ass] urban neighborhoods
   across America. As a [shrivel-dicked] businessman looking for a
   lucrative investment, [evil] Messner sees a ripe opportunity here."

   Mayor Richard M. Daley has yet to speak publicly about whether he will
   oppose Messner's human hamster cage, or allow the vile prick to wipe
   the bleeding wound that is Carney Gardens from existence.

