
   PHOENIX, AZ--In what insiders say is an attempt to revitalize his
   flagging campaign and convince voters that he is still a
   straight-talking maverick, Sen. John McCain (R-AZ) announced Sunday
   that he will subject himself to the same mental torment and physical
   abuse he endured nearly 40 years ago at the same Vietnamese camp where
   he was once held as a prisoner of war.
   [4]Enlarge Image McCain To 

   The Hanoi Hilton, which will be reopened this weekend to re-imprison
   Sen. McCain.

   "On Saturday at approximately 2:40 a.m.  I will fly over the capital
   city of Hanoi and have my plane's right wing blown off by a Russian
   missile," said McCain, adding that the force of the ejection from an
   aging A-4 Skyhawk should render him unconscious and break both of his
   arms and "preferably [his] right leg." "I will then be taken to a bug-
   and rat-infested cell where, with both nobility and grace, I will
   suffer the worst forms of human indignities."

   McCain, once considered a shoo-in for the Republican presidential
   nomination, insisted that his upcoming stay at the Hanoi torture
   facility was simply a late addition to a previously planned trip to
   Southeast Asia, and has nothing to do with his faltering campaign.

   But a source close to the campaign said the senator's decision to
   revisit his indescribable degradation at the hands of the Viet Cong
   was prompted by a desire to "get back to his roots," and "reconnect
   with the struggles that defined him as a leader."

   "The fact is, Sen. McCain feels that he's changed somehow from the
   independent, eternally haunted outsider that he once was," the source
   said. "He hopes that revisiting the extraordinary horrors he endured
   so many years ago will reinstill in him the sense of purpose and
   commitment he is so respected for. And what better way to reignite the
   political fire within than by having sharpened rods of bamboo jammed
   under his fingernails?"
     McCain

   "With both nobility and grace, I will suffer the worst forms of human
   indignities."

   According to campaign documents released to the media, the visit will
   cost more than $10 million, most of which will go toward acquiring a
   Grushin S-75 surface-to-air missile, renovating McCain's cell to its
   exact 1970s-era condition, paying medical personnel to provide
   inefficient and cruel treatment, and hiring Vietnamese citizens to act
   as the Viet Cong.

   "Just when you think McCain is down and out, he announces the most
   brilliant move we've seen in American politics in a generation," ABC
   political correspondent George Stephanopoulos said. "With [Rudolph]
   Giuliani beating him in the polls and [Mitt] Romney outpacing him in
   fundraising, McCain's only remaining advantage is that he successfully
   withstood atrocities beyond our comprehension. And to subject himself
   to those same unspeakable acts of physical violence at the age of 68
   should dispel any doubt among voters that he's too old to be in the
   White House."

   Stephanopoulos added that McCain must be careful not to return from
   Southeast Asia too soon before the primaries, or his act of courage,
   integrity, and determination may fade from the memory of American
   voters.

   "This trip is a huge political gamble," Washington Post columnist E.J.
   Dionne, Jr. wrote Tuesday. "Still, being forced to stay awake for six
   days as your captors douse you with water and feed you rotting food
   sounds a lot more convincing than John Kerry's campaign strategy of
   simply talking about his military experience."

   According to recent polls, a majority of Americans say McCain's
   announcement has made them reconsider his candidacy.

   "I've always admired McCain, but he's disappointed me in recent
   months," Cincinnati resident Ben Krepps, 33, said. "After so many
   years in the political mainstream, he's gone soft. Maybe some long,
   cruel nights are exactly what he needs to get his head back into this
   race."

   Others, however, including unaffiliated Republican consultant David
   Winston, argue that McCain's trip will only hurt his presidential
   chances.

   "In John McCain's attempt to find the old John McCain, he is actually
   just solidifying his position as the new, more pandering John McCain,"
   Winston said. "Yes, the old John McCain withstood seemingly endless
   torture, and people respected that. But a second time around? It just
   looks desperate."

   With McCain's drastic move sending shock waves through the political
   world, Sens. Hillary Clinton (D-NY) and Barack Obama (D-IL) both
   announced plans to send themselves back to their respective Ivy League
   law schools to reenroll in their most challenging courses.

