
   LOS ANGELES--A study released today by the University of California,
   Los Angeles is sending shockwaves through the social, behavioral, and
   publicity sciences, after finding that everyone in Hollywood is close
   personal friends with everyone else in Hollywood.
   [4]Enlarge Image hollywood 

   Cameron Diaz, George Clooney, Julia Roberts, and Denzel Washingon all
   gather for a game of Monopoly at Tony Hopkins' place, like they do
   every Sunday.

   "The evidence shows that our nation's show-business capital is a town
   of virtually boundless goodwill and camaraderie, where the
   backstabbing, ego-rivalry, and grudge-holding common to the rest of
   society do not exist," said UCLA sociology professor Gina Carlisle,
   lead author of the five-year, 700-page study. "The entire region is a
   veritable utopia of deep, abiding interpersonal affection and mutual
   respect."

   Additionally, the report found that 98 percent of Hollywood residents
   "love [their friends'] work."

   The findings, published this month in the journal American
   Psychologist, were based on information culled from DVD commentary
   tracks, promotional junket footage, talk show appearances, more than
   1,500 behind-the-scenes magazine profiles, and hundreds of poolside
   cocktail party conversations.

   "I love David Caruso," said Caruso's CSI: Miami costar Khandi
   Alexander, one of thousands of celebrity best friends quoted in the
   study. "He's just a great guy--always joking around on the set, making
   the crew laugh, and just being an all-around wonderful person. At
   first I thought it would be intimidating to work with such an iconic
   star, but after a few days, I thought of him as a great friend."

   But the intense friendships that run through the Hollywood community
   also extend to those beyond the red-carpet elite, the study found.

   "Even persons with relatively limited connections to the Hollywood
   hierarchy, such as caterers and valet attendants, regularly cited such
   A-list celebrities as George Clooney as their 'good friends,'" said
   UCLA's Carlisle, who herself described Clooney as "a friend." "No one
   is excluded from the near-universal circle of intimacy and brotherhood
   that surrounds the city."

   "It is a truly egoless culture," she added.

   According to the study, friendships formed in Hollywood are stronger,
   more passionate, and more meaningful than any friendships yet
   measured.

   "While we were making Transformers, the whole cast and crew were like
   family," actress Megan Fox said in an Access Hollywood episode cited
   by the study. "I would totally love to work with those people again if
   the decision is ever made to do a sequel. That's how much those
   friendships mean to me."

   Hollywood friendships are also longer lasting, researchers found.

   Producer Gil Netter, also quoted in the study, expressed these
   sentiments about some of his many best friends: "When we did Dude
   [Where's My Car?], Ashton [Kutcher], Jennifer [Garner], and Seann
   [William Scott] were just on the verge of exploding. Since then,
   they've all become much bigger stars, but to me they're still just the
   same great friends of mine they always were."

   The study's authors say if research continues, the principles of
   social interaction found in Hollywood could, one day, serve as an
   example to the rest of humanity of how to live together in harmony and
   universal love.

   "Bad-mouthing others' work, looking down on those who earn less money
   than oneself, making insulting assumptions about the amount of plastic
   surgery others have had--none of these things happen in Hollywood,"
   Carlisle said. "It is a city of total and unconditional respect, both
   for the integrity of everyone's creative endeavors, and for everyone
   personally, as human beings."

   Added Carlisle: "If every community could interact with the same
   genuine compassion and goodwill that Hollywood has somehow achieved,
   the world would be a much better place."

