
   FINDLAY, OH--In what some economists believe to be a sign that the
   U.S. could be headed for a recession, a job opening last month at the
   Findlay-area Bob Evans prompted a deluge of more than 3 million job
   applications from out-of-work Americans, restaurant manager Tom Fields
   confirmed Tuesday.

   Within three days of placing a "Help Wanted" sign at the Bob Evans
   front entrance, Fields reportedly received more than 800,000 resumés
   for the part-time hostess job. The newly available position offers no
   health benefits, minimum-wage pay, and a dress code that mandates both
   the standard red-and-white Bob Evans kerchief and "a smile," as well
   as a 15 percent discount on all meals eaten during one's shift.
   [4]Enlarge Image Bob Evans 

   More than 74,000 qualified applicants wait to speak with the manager.

   "Word of a job opening in this country sure does travel fast," the
   visibly exhausted Fields said. "I'm just dreading having to make those
   3,199,999 rejection phone calls."

   Over the next two weeks, another 2 million applications poured into
   the chain eatery from college graduates, former teachers, engineers,
   factory workers, computer programmers, 60,000 Americans formerly
   employed in the private sector, construction workers, Ph.D.
   candidates, and nearly 1.3 million Americans who have previous food
   service experience--including 230 former executive chefs.

   Fields, who decided to forgo calling the group's 6 million personal
   and professional references before making this particular hire, called
   the selection of potential hostesses "very strong."

   Although competition among the applicants has been fierce, many say
   they are simply glad to once again have the chance to apply for a job.

   "I would kill for this opportunity," said former Ford plant supervisor
   Chris Thaney, who has been unemployed since 2006 and previously earned
   $75,000 a year. "I really think this is the lucky break my family and
   I have been waiting for."

   Thaney, who waited for 15 hours for an interview in a line extending
   out the door, around the block, and into neighboring Toledo, said he
   was so excited by the possibility of securing the 25-hour-a-week
   position that he uprooted his family from Georgia and moved them to
   Findlay.

   After the interview, Fields told the 43-year-old father of three that
   he would keep his resumé on file and "would let [him] know."
   [5]Enlarge Image Job Applications 

   Former pediatrician Dr. Peter Weintraub, whose beeper number is (203)
   494-1375, was not offered the job.

   "The final decision will be tough," Fields said. "We're looking for
   someone who is a team player, has good people skills, and won't buckle
   under the pressure. This place can get pretty nuts during breakfast,
   and we're always slammed after church on Sundays."

   Fields said that he has already gone through one round of interviews,
   and plans to tackle the rest of the 2 million resumés piled up on his
   desk by the end of next month. He hopes to have the field narrowed to
   400,000 by the end of August.

   Leading economists said they were not surprised by the turnout. More
   than 4 million Americans reportedly applied for a job at a Fort Wayne,
   IN American Eagle Outfitters in December, and all 7.7 million of the
   nation's unemployed expressed interest in a part-time, holiday-only
   position at the Westmoreland Mall Sunglass Hut last November.

   A number of experts also predicted that, once the position at Bob
   Evans is filled, there will not be another job opening in America for
   at least six months.

   "I completely botched the interview," said former AT&T mainframe
   programmer Richard Morrow, who studied the Bob Evans menu extensively
   for the interview, but was flustered when Fields only seemed
   interested in Morrow's experience studying abroad in college. "I
   wanted it too bad and it showed."

   Thus far Fields has remained tight-lipped about any leading candidates
   for the job. Sources amongst the waitstaff, however, were "almost
   certain" that the position would be filled as early as next Wednesday
   by Fields'16-year-old niece, Samantha.

