
   NIPPERSINK, MI--In the '80s, this little town made its name in the
   news with a local eccentric old coot decked out from head to toe in
   thousands of buttons. In the '90s, it was the goofy car nut who
   converted his Chevrolet to look like the Statue of Liberty. Now, as
   residents and law-enforcement officials learned recently, this tiny
   Great Lakes fishing community has a local character who stands out
   with a zany hobby all his own: oddball Matthew Malbert, an otherwise
   unassuming pharmacist and school-board member, has a special passion
   for ritually murdering and dismembering at least 27 known victims.
   [4]Enlarge Image Area Man's Quirky Hobby Kills 27 

   Malbert in one of more than 800 goofball photos he took of himself and
   his hobby table over the past nine years

   "Oh, God, oh, sweet Jesus, this is unbelievable," said Malbert's
   neighbor and longtime bowling partner Greg Henniken, who "never in a
   million years" would have suspected Malbert could be capable of
   anything this outlandish. When asked to comment on the recently
   uncovered menagerie of human body parts in Malbert's basement
   hobby-room, Henniken simply held his hand to his forehead as if to
   say, "Good grief!"

   "This is truly beyond my comprehension," said Nippersink Police Chief
   Orin Lambert, just one of a dozen residents who have found themselves
   on TV as their wacky neighbor gets more and more attention for his
   unusual pastime. Malbert's hijinks were first reported in a surprise
   "breaking news" segment on the local news, then on the front page of
   the evening gazette, and now on countless network-news features as
   growing interest in the nutty character's antics put Nippersink on the
   map.

   "I've lived here all my life, and nothing like this has ever happened
   before," Lambert said. "This is just--well, I've never seen anything
   like it."

   "Never, ever," he added.

   Malbert, who modestly describes himself in a newly discovered private
   journal--complete with diagrams of the female reproductive system,
   Polaroid photo collages of sawed-open human abdomens, and his own
   tiny, methodical handwriting--as a simple "collector," has already
   been on the front of Newsweek, Time, and more newspapers than local
   residents care to count. In fact, this longtime Michigan resident,
   whose work was until two weeks ago a complete secret to everyone but
   his more than two dozen bound and gagged victims, is soon to be the
   subject of a major profile on the popular TV program 48 Hours.

   Malbert, on the advice of his court-appointed lawyer, was unable to
   publicly comment on all the fuss over his hobby, but, in typical
   fashion, released a short, offbeat statement through his attorney.

   "This was nothing more than a way for me to while away the time," the
   statement read in part. "Honestly, I had never planned to share it
   with anyone. It did it purely for myself."

   Malbert's parents, unassuming folks residing in his hometown of Des
   Moines, IA, said word of their kooky son's newfound fame came as a
   "complete shock" to them.

   "When he was younger, he liked to horse around with [and mutilate] the
   animals around the farm," said mother Ethel Malbert, holding a
   third-grade photo of her son. "But that was just kid's stuff, you
   know. We never thought he would take it this far."

   "He was a quiet, normal boy," added Malbert, quipping that the head
   injury her son suffered when he was 12 might help explain his offbeat
   obsession.

   "In 25 years of forensic analysis, this is the first time I've come
   across anything so involved," said FBI agent Randolf McGrant, who was
   flown in from Detroit to file a report on Nippersink's new local
   celebrity. "And the scary part is that it may be many years before any
   of us know the full scope of what he's done."

   Describing Malbert's work as a combination of taxidermy, sculpture,
   canning, cross-stitch, and "a bizarre form of poetry," McGrant says
   it's unlikely the media spotlight on Nippersink's most famous
   eccentric will let up anytime soon.

   It seems this quiet hamlet has just earned a place in the history
   books, all thanks to that mild-mannered gentleman everyone simply knew
   as "that crazy ritual-murder guy."

