
   WASHINGTON, DC--Braving balmy temperatures and sunny skies, millions
   of scarfless snowmen and snowwomen gathered in cities across the world
   Tuesday to raise public awareness about the heavy toll global warming
   is taking on their health and well-being.
   [4]Enlarge Image Nation's Snowmen March Against Global Warming 

   Snowmen from across the nation gather at the Washington Monument to
   protest global warming.

   According to organizers of marches in Washington, Atlanta, Montreal,
   Berlin, London, Reykjavik, and Moscow, global warming is the primary
   cause of the steep reduction in the snowman population throughout the
   Northern Hemisphere. Demonstrators worldwide called on their
   governments to take more aggressive steps to reduce the effects of
   climate change.

   Organizers estimated the crowd at more than 375,000, but D.C. Police
   Commissioner Charles Stacey estimated turnout at 30,000 whole snowmen,
   with scattered rounded abdomens accounting for an additional 5,000.
   Atlanta organizers and police agree that all demonstrators had melted
   by 11 a.m.

   Joe Centigrade, president of the Advocates For Beings Of Frozen
   Precipitation, spoke at a mass rally Tuesday on Washington's National
   Mall.

   "The unseasonably warm winters of the recent past are a clear
   indication of a real environmental threat to humans and their frozen
   simulacra," said Centigrade, his coals arranged in a frowning pattern.
   "As snowmen and snowwomen, we accept the inevitability of melting, but
   the actions of man are causing us to evaporate well before our time."

   Speakers at the Washington rally included a Chicago snowwoman who had
   lost three snowchildren to warm temperatures, the Rev. Jesse Jackson,
   and Larry Chilly, formerly a 6-foot-tall, triple-segmented Muncie, IN
   snowman, who had been reduced to a slushy head.

   Centigrade told the slowly melting snowcrowd that as recently as 15
   years ago, the average life span of a snowperson built in late
   December was three weeks to a month. Today, that same snowperson has
   an average life span of two weeks.

   Centigrade also recounted stories of once-jolly snowmen unable to keep
   their carrot noses in their fast-melting faces, and of others who were
   made of only two undersize segments.

   "In many regions of New England today, there's not even enough snow on
   the ground to make snowballs, much less a torso," Centigrade said.
   "Instead, some snowmen are stuck together with slush and leaves rather
   than pure, white snow. We must take steps now to end their suffering."

   Bearing signs with such slogans as "You Can't Build A Snowman With
   Rain" and "Winter = Life," the crystalline-ice protestors, many of
   whom had chartered refrigerated tractor-trailers and ice-cream trucks
   to travel to the mass protest, complained that popular stereotypes
   about snowmen obscure and trivialize the crisis.
   [5]Enlarge Image Nation's Snowmen March Against Global Warming 

   Larry Chilly speaks out against mankind's global irresponsibility.

   "Humans sneer at us, 'If you want to stay intact, go to the North Pole
   and live with Santa,'" said Susie Flakeman, a Thunder Bay, Ontario
   snowwoman waiting in line with hundreds of others to use a
   Porta-Freezer. "But less than one-half of 1 percent of us ever receive
   that honor. Most of us end up victims of the scourge that almost
   killed Frosty: man-made climate change."

   The protest was largely peaceful, disrupted only by a disturbing
   incident in which one distraught snowman hurled himself into the
   reflecting pool of the National Mall. He suffered third-degree slush
   on over 90 percent of his body before rescuers could recover him. He
   was rushed to a local meat locker where he was pronounced melted on
   arrival.

   Some scientists refuted the snowbeings' claims regarding global
   warming.

   "Throughout history, the earth has endured periods of temperature
   fluctuation," said Dr. Harley Morrison, a biochemist who has advised
   President Bush on scientific issues. "Also, there have already been
   several major blizzards throughout North America this season alone. I
   made a snowman myself, and he lasted for several weeks."

   Late word arrived Tuesday evening that the Moscow protest was
   violently dispersed by riot police bearing hot-water hoses and snow
   blowers. Moscow officials said the snowmen were illegally blocking
   pedestrian traffic near the Kremlin and causing people to slip and
   fall in their slushy wakes. Snow leaders, including Centigrade,
   condemned the crackdown.

   "Those of us who remember the Icelandic anti-heated-sidewalk riots of
   the 1980s know that the powers that be despise and fear snowmen who
   fight for their rights," Centigrade said. "They'd rather kill the
   messengers than face the fact that our ecosystems are changing
   irreparably. We're prepared to stay in D.C. as long as it takes until
   Congress agrees to listen to our demands."

   Before he could conclude his remarks, Centigrade's face slid off.

