   Joe Torre

   NEW YORK--Saying the American League wild-card bid is "beneath the
   dignity of the Yankees organization" and "an affront to everything
   [we] stand for," New York Yankees owner George Steinbrenner and
   manager Joe Torre told reporters during a press conference Wednesday
   that the Yankees have respectfully declined the opportunity to
   participate in Major League Baseball's postseason if they have to do
   so as the American League's wild-card team.

   "On behalf of the entire Yankee team: Thanks, but no thanks," said
   Steinbrenner, adding that the Yankees would only play in the 2007
   playoffs if they were able to take their "rightful place" as the
   American League East representatives. "Please don't patronize us with
   by making us the wild card. The New York Yankees aren't wild cards.
   We're the New York Yankees, for God's sake. The New York Yankees. And
   we have our dignity."

   "Wild card?" Steinbrenner added. "Please."

   The announcement came following a three-hour meeting between
   Steinbrenner, Torre, and baseball Commissioner Bud Selig, in which
   both Torre and Steinbrenner attempted to convince the commissioner
   that the Yankees were anything but wild cards--a position Steinbrenner
   later called "demeaning and pathetic."

   "We're not an unproven, intermediate expansion team whose qualities
   are unknown and whose team character has not been established," said
   Steinbrenner, referring to the strict definition of a wild card. "The
   wild card is for those lesser organizations, teams like the Colorado
   Rockies, or--ugh, I can't believe I am actually going to utter their
   name--the 'Los Angeles Angels of Anaheim.'" 

   "You have to consider the elite pedigree of this historic franchise,"
   Torre added. "The Yankees have won 26 World Series titles and 39
   American League pennants. To even think we would reduce ourselves to
   such an embarrassing position is an absurdity bordering on insanity.
   We might as well drop down to Single A."

   The Yankees, who finished the season with a 94-68 record, leaving them
   two games behind the Boston Red Sox in the AL East standings, are in
   fact statistically the American League wild-card team. Torre
   maintained, however, that the Yankees are above statistics, and answer
   to a "much higher calling."

   "We have family, friends, and billions upon billions of fans who
   deserve much more than for us to just submit to being spat upon,"
   Torre said. "The fact that we have, in the past, even participated in
   divisional series and league championship series is beneath us. I've
   been saying for some time that the Yankees should only have to play in
   one game the entire year: an intrasquad match to decide the world
   champion."

   Though the Yankees did accept wild-card births in both the 1995 and
   1997 seasons, Steinbrenner said he was not made aware of it at the
   time. Had he been, the Yankees' controversial, often polarizing owner
   stated, he would have most assuredly pulled his team out of the
   playoffs to show respect for Yankee greats such as Babe Ruth, Lou
   Gehrig, Joe DiMaggio, and Mickey Mantle--none of whom, Steinbrenner
   said, ever donned the pinstripes as a wild-card team.

   The wild-card system was introduced by Commissioner Selig in 1995.

   "I'm not even sure how this, what do you call it, 'wild card?'
   Right...how this wild card even works," said Yankees shortstop and
   team captain Derek Jeter, who made "air quotes" gestures every time he
   uttered the phrase. "Can a team even make it to the World Series from
   such a position? Seems like charity to me. And the Yankees are
   nobody's charity case."

   "Try to remember that the Yankees are blessed by God himself," Jeter
   added. "If God wanted us to be a wild-card team, He would have done so
   when He created the Yankees over 100 years ago." 

   When informed three of the last five World Series titles were, in
   fact, won by wild-card teams, catcher Jorge Posada stated that it was
   because other Major-League clubs acted out of the weakness of false
   sentiment, having felt sorry for "those lesser teams' lowly,
   disgusting, and frankly wretched position."

   "How do you think Florida beat us in 2003?" Posada said. "Because the
   Yankees are too classy a ball club to beat up on a clearly inferior
   team."

   Though the majority of the Yankee team affirmed their commitment to
   boycotting the playoffs if their wild-card status is not "corrected,"
   third baseman Alex Rodriguez stated he would still play, adding that
   with so many Yankees out of the lineup he would get more at-bats, more
   balls hit to him in the field, and would finally get a chance to
   pitch, a position Rodriguez said he is "probably pretty good at."

