
   WASHINGTON--The Senate Judiciary Committee announced Monday that,
   after five days of intense questioning, internal debate, and outside
   testimony, it is no closer to confirming Dr. Richard J. Applebaum,
   President George W. Bush's controversial nominee to be the 73rd
   presidential dentist in U.S. history.
   [4]Enlarge Image Bush's New Dentist 

   Applebaum--a Howard University College of Dentistry graduate, owner of
   the private practice Gentle Dental, and close friend of the Bush
   family--faced a seemingly unending battery of questions during the
   first week of his confirmation hearing, with the committee's 19
   members grilling him on issues ranging from tooth decay to tartar
   control to the divisive "brushing side-to-side or up-and-down"
   question.

   According to committee chairman Sen. Patrick Leahy (D-VT), however,
   the most important matter is restoring honor and dignity to the
   dentist's office.

   "We cannot stand by and allow the Republicans to rubber-stamp another
   dentist," Leahy said on NBC's Meet The Press Sunday. "We need someone
   with integrity. Someone who will not ignore untreated abscesses in the
   posterior region of the mouth. Someone who will not simply be told
   that Mr. Bush flosses daily and blindly accept that as fact. Someone
   who is tough on plaque, yet gentle around the gums."

   Applebaum's testimony thus far indicates that he has always been a
   vocal proponent of mercury amalgam fillings, which does not sit well
   with some of the Democrats in the Senate. He has, however, earned
   bipartisan approval for his policy on latex gloves. In addition, he
   has shown a commitment to featuring a wide selection of toothpaste
   flavors--including pina colada--and, with the exception of two
   occasions in the summer of 1992, has consistently consulted patients
   beforehand as to their favorite flavor.

   His stance on fluoride treatment is unknown.

   Although Applebaum's testimony has revealed a philosophy largely in
   line with current dental thought, his record is not unblemished. An
   FBI investigation launched shortly after his nomination revealed
   conflicting viewpoints on the issue of brushing.

   "Dr. Applebaum, according to our records, in March of 1999, you told a
   patient by the name of Bev Kaplansky that it was advisable to brush
   twice a day. Yet just two years later, in February of 2001, you told
   one Mr. Grayson Peters that brushing should occur after every meal," a
   transcript of Sen. Dick Durbin's (D-IL) questioning read in part.
   "Well, which is it, Dr. Applebaum? Two times a day, or after every
   meal?"

   Applebaum's refusal to answer Sen. Durbin's question has led many
   Democrats and some Republicans to declare that they will not support
   his confirmation, claiming that they do not want "another Dr.
   Cesario."

   Dr. Samuel Cesario, Bush's previous dentist, served for a tumultuous
   two years before resigning in October amid accusations that he
   politicized the position by handing out free toothbrushes and floss
   dispensers to the president, that he was pro-gingivitis, and that he
   ordered the illegal torture of several U.S.-held detainees.

   While most agree that Applebaum represents a significant upgrade from
   Cesario, Sen. Arlen Specter (R-PA) was disappointed that Bush did not
   select the senator's own dentist, Dr. Harry Gellert, whom Specter has
   long championed as "a very nice man."

   The media, meanwhile, has often portrayed Applebaum as a beneficiary
   of nepotism, as both his father and grandfather worked in the dental
   profession. Some critics have been even harsher. In a recent segment
   that has been highly circulated on the Internet and within the
   political blogosphere, MSNBC's Keith Olbermann called Applebaum, 52, a
   "spineless hypocrite who is being called on not to clean teeth, but to
   obsequiously kowtow to the Bush administration."

   "In a 1987 checkup with a young child who shall remain nameless, you
   purportedly discouraged the consumption of so-called 'sweets,' but
   just moments later, sir, you rewarded that same child with a lollipop
   from the office treasure chest," Olbermann said during a "special
   comment" addressed to Applebaum on the program Countdown. "Are we to
   believe that you do not classify lollipops as 'sweets,' sir? And more
   importantly: Is this really the man we want scraping the gums of the
   leader of the free world?"

   Though Bush, who is said to be suffering from a severe toothache, has
   urged a swift confirmation and even threatened to name Applebaum as a
   recess appointment, there is speculation that the Democrats may
   attempt to filibuster the nomination, as they did to 1968 chief
   justice appointee Abe Fortas and 2003 White House plumber nominee
   Dave.

