
   FORT WORTH, TX--Despite having been on the job for nine months,
   RadioShack CEO Julian Day said Monday that he still has "no idea" how
   the home electronics store manages to stay open.
     RadioShack CEO

   CEO Julian Day

   "There must be some sort of business model that enables this company
   to make money, but I'll be damned if I know what it is," Day said.
   "You wouldn't think that people still buy enough strobe lights and
   extension cords to support an entire nationwide chain, but I guess
   they must, or I wouldn't have this desk to sit behind all day."

   The retail outlet boasts more than 6,000 locations in the United
   States, and is known best for its wall-sized displays of
   obscure-looking analog electronics components and its notoriously
   desperate, high-pressure sales staff. Nevertheless, it ranks as a
   Fortune 500 company, with gross revenues of over $4.5 billion and
   fiscal quarter earnings averaging tens of millions of dollars.

   "Have you even been inside of a RadioShack recently?" Day asked. "Just
   walking into the place makes you feel vaguely depressed and alienated.
   Maybe our customers are at the mall anyway and don't feel like driving
   to Best Buy? I suppose that's possible, but still, it's just...weird."
   [4]Enlarge Image RadioShack 

   A RadioShack store that somehow manages to bring in enough paying
   customers to turn a profit.

   After taking over as CEO, Day ordered a comprehensive, top-down review
   of RadioShack's administrative operations, inventory and purchasing,
   suppliers, demographics, and marketing strategies. He has also
   diligently pored over weekly budget reports, met with investors, taken
   numerous conference calls with regional managers about "circulars or
   flyers or something," and even spent hours playing with the company's
   "baffling" 200-In-One electronics kit. Yet so far none of these things
   have helped Day understand the moribund company's apparent allure.

   "Even the name 'RadioShack'--can you imagine two less appealing words
   placed next to one another?" Day said. "What is that, some kind of
   World War II terminology? Are ham radio operators still around, even?
   Aren't we in the digital age?"

   "Well, our customers are out there somewhere, and thank God they are,"
   Day added.

   One of Day's theories about RadioShack's continued solvency involves
   wedding DJs, emergency cord replacement, and off-brand wireless
   telephones. Another theory entails countless RadioShack gift cards
   that sit unredeemed in their recipients' wallets. Day has even
   conjectured that the store is "still coasting on" an enormous fortune
   made from remote-control toy cars in the mid-1970s.
     RadioShack Revenues

   Day admitted, however, that none of these theories seems particularly
   plausible.

   "I once went into a RadioShack location incognito in order to gauge
   customer service," Day said. "It was about as inviting as a visit to
   the DMV. For the life of me, I couldn't see anything I wanted to buy.
   Finally, I figured I'd pick up some Enercell AA batteries, though
   truthfully they're not appreciably cheaper than the name brands."

   "I know one thing," Day continued. "If Sony and JVC start including
   gold-tipped cable cords with their products, we're screwed."

   In the cover letter to his December 2006 report to investors, "Radio
   Shack: Still Here In The 21st Century," Day wrote that he had no
   reason to believe that the coming year would not be every bit as good
   as years past, provided that people kept on doing things much the same
   way they always had.

   Despite this cheerful boosterism, Day admitted that nothing has
   changed during his tenure and he doesn't exactly know what he can do
   to improve the chain.

   "I'd like to capitalize on the store's strong points, but I honestly
   don't know what they are," Day said. "Every location is full of
   bizarre adapters, random chargers, and old boom boxes, and some sales
   guy is constantly hovering over you. It's like walking into your
   grandpa's basement. You always expect to see something cool, but it
   never delivers."

   Added Day: "I may never know the answer. No matter how many times I
   punch the sales figures into this crappy Tandy desk calculator, it
   just doesn't add up."

