
   CHELTENHAM, ENGLAND--In a resounding display of horsemanship,
   lancemanship, and puissance that marked both his first major
   tournament success and a great victory on the international stage for
   the British crown, the gallant English Prince William did mightily
   unseat Prince Willem- Alexander of the Netherlands in combat at the
   Cheltenham Jousts this Sunday week.
   [4]Enlarge Image Prince William 

   The valiant Prince William triumphant in victory.

   The prince, his aspect as always noble and his armour brightly agleam,
   did strike his gentleman-foe the Prince of Orange with a single
   shivering blow to the very center of his greatshield, all glory be to
   God, ensuring, as well, a victory in global currency exchange.

   "Alack! I am bested, and fall heavy to the ground, and must therefore
   renegotiate the terms of special exchange between our nations when
   managing debts that predate conversion to the new EU standard," quoth
   Willem-Alexander as he tumbled from his steed, acknowledging his
   opponent the better man and meeting his fate with honour. "In sooth, a
   rate of 1.75 euros to the pound is more than fair, with interest
   compounding from the date of this match forward, so mighty is the
   stroke that undoes me."
   [5]Enlarge Image Prince William jump 

   Magnanimous in victory, as befits the heir to the Throne of All
   England, Prince William did forsake the cries of bloodlust from the
   lower galleries, granting the Dutch prince the boon of his life and
   demanding in return only a 4.5 percent increase in durable-goods
   tariffs on imports from the Netherlands and her subject nations.

   "Hear me, O Britain!" exclaimed His Royal Highness, whose voice was
   heard to peal forth from the lists as thunder from great
   mountain-height, ringing in every corner of that green and pleasant
   land, as well as on BBC Two and internationally on ESPN, garnering a
   nod of approval from the Queen, who gazed on regally from the royal
   box. "This man hath proven himself worthy of our mercy. For to fall in
   joust before the Crown Prince of England--the very herald of God on
   Earth--is no shame; nor would I call foeman any prince who hath the
   strength to acknowledge Jesus as his Saviour and to hold inflation to
   a stunningly low 1.3 percent. Therefore I spare his life, and call my
   noble cousin mere cousin no more, but brother, in hopes our fair
   nations may find brotherhood indeed."

   And 'spite a fortnight full of tragic news that wicked Fate had split
   the comely pair, the noble Prince William did grant a victory nosegay
   to his former love, the beauteous Kate Middleton, who with wet and
   melancholy eye did the prince's gaze avoid, as befits a commoner.

   "Hail to the crown prince of our fair isles, hail!" said Herald-Royal
   Anthony the Blair, Grand Vizier of the Realm, Prime Minister of All
   Britain, and Officiary of the Games, upon presenting Prince William
   with the Cheltenham Tournament Virgin Atlantic Trophy. "For he has
   made the doughty enemy void his saddle, and hight him upon his very
   fud; and many a rude and glorious tale shall be of this day's deeds
   retold."

   "Such feats of brawn and bravery have we scarce beheld since Prince's
   father, Charles of Wales, did ride forth in errantry, and did in
   single combat meet, and unhorsing humiliate, sundry knights of the
   Falkland Islands," added Blair with a hearty heavenward thrust of his
   gauntled fist.

   Upon being relieved of his helm, breastplate, and greaves by his
   trusty squires the Minister of State for Trade and Her Majesty's
   Ambassador to the Netherlands, the prince did declare a feast day and
   order the roasting of a fatted ox. The beast was shared out in equal
   parts among all freedmen in attendance, and small beer and brown ale
   was given forth in full fair measure. A fine and merry bawd did last
   until the rising of Tuesday's sun brought forth the cock's cry,
   heralding once again a round of bold and robust trading on the London
   Stock Exchange, so well delighted and put at ease by the day's events
   Albion's investors were.

   Also late from the Netherlands came grave tidings that Prince
   Willem-Alexander hath suffered wounds diverse and mortal, and that he
   ails sick abed i'the Amsterdam Medical Center, where doctors are
   struggling with all their art against profuse hemmorhaging cerebral
   and abdominal.

