
   NEW YORK--Delirium swept the nation this summer as the release of the
   seventh and final Harry Potter novel sent millions of Americans into a
   frenzy over some little wizard boy and all his flying wizard buddies
   going on another one of their little wizard adventures.
   [4]Enlarge Image Nation in Frenzy 

   WIZARD FEVER: Just look at all the people in their pointy wizard hats.

   Thousands lined up at bookstores to purchase the fanciful tale, which
   chronicles the exploits of the adolescent wizard with his pointy hat
   and glasses, as he and his magical little friends go traipsing into
   the forbidden forest and attempt to defeat the evil Hufflestuff people
   with the sword of destiny, magic potions, and other such fantasy
   dragon bullshit.

   "I can't wait to see what happens to Harry!" said Boston resident
   Julie Nolsteen, 28, just one of many grown adults with an unbridled
   desire to read about child sorcerers playing with their little
   cauldrons and frolicking around reciting magical spells.

   Nolsteen proceeded to rub her hands together with anticipation and
   ponder the fate of her favorite character, some guy named Dumblededoo
   or something.

   The entire nation has been all worked up ever since J.K. Rowling
   announced that she would be concluding the series, with men and women
   waiting with bated breath to see if all the tiny little wizards were
   going to do all their crazy magic curses again. Message boards flooded
   with comments from fans who eagerly wondered whether the wizard boy
   was going to be eaten by mean old witches, or if he and all his
   mystical pals were going to find the fairy crystal and have themselves
   a grand old wizard time.

   "This is the most important book in the history of literature," wrote
   one man wearing a robe with moons and stars on it, who was clearly
   unable to conceal his enthusiasm for flying horses and magic dust. "I
   hope Lord Voldemort loses!"

   Although the fervor has subsided since the book's release this summer,
   the promise of a new Harry Potter film next year has already gotten
   the whole country excited beyond all reason to see the little wizard
   boy fly around on his little broomstick for two and a half hours.

