
   The Democrats' resounding midterm election triumph--sweeping both
   houses of Congress, as well as a majority of state legislatures and
   governorships--immediately bred suspicion among party leadership that
   Karl Rove, President Bush's closest adviser and the political
   mastermind behind Bush's rise to power, was once again pulling the
   strings.
   [4]Enlarge Image Karl Rove R 

   "Let's not celebrate just yet," Democratic National Committee Chairman
   Howard Dean said on Nov. 8, shortly after the more closely contested
   seats were declared in the Democrats' favor. "This decisive Democratic
   victory could very well be part of an unfathomably brilliant plan of
   Karl Rove's to position the Republicans for the 2016 elections, and
   probably beyond. History has shown that the man is an unstoppable evil
   genius. You can't underestimate him."

   Rove, who has consistently proven himself over the last 12 years to be
   the only person in Washington capable of affecting national elections,
   refused to comment.

   "We were blindsided when he gave us the House, but then Rove really
   twisted the knife with the Senate victory," CNN's Paul Begala said.
   "Evidently, he must be five or six steps ahead on the chessboard,
   executing a strategy we can only guess at."

   Political watchdog groups said that Rove left too many obvious clues.
   They pointed to the breaking of the Mark Foley sex scandal, the Jack
   Abramoff lobbying scandal, the political downfall of House Majority
   Leader Tom DeLay, the refusal of embattled Speaker Of The House Dennis
   Hastert and Secretary Of Defense Donald Rumsfeld to step down, and the
   deaths of hundreds of U.S. soldiers in Iraq since the 2004
   presidential election. Even the escalating civil insurrection in Iraq
   "sports the trademark Rove touch," in the words of one blogger for the
   political website The Huffington Post.

   "For a little while there, it looked like Rove's nefarious master plan
   might be undone by Kerry's bungled remarks about the troops, but it
   succeeded anyway," New York Times columnist Paul Krugman said.
   "Unless, of course, Kerry's remarks were all part of the plan, too."

   Still others have posited a second Rove involvement theory, in which
   they believe he predicted a Republican victory two weeks' prior to
   Election Day so he could bet heavily on a Democratic victory and make
   "an enormous killing in Vegas." They speculate Rove then either kept
   the winnings for himself or funneled them into a GOP slush fund.

   Rove did not return calls concerning these charges.

   "Can't people see we're playing right into this man's hands?"
   Democratic Congressional Campaign Chairman Rep. Rahm Emanuel (D-IL)
   said. "The fact that he did not address this issue publicly proves his
   collusion. Leave it to Rove to poison a victory this sweet."

