
   WASHINGTON, DC--Plagued by late fees, high interest rates, and
   harassing creditors, the U.S. took out a debt-consolidation loan
   Monday, combining the nation's $6.1 trillion debt into a single, easy
   monthly payment.

   [4]Enlarge Image Debt-Consolidation 

   Bush watches an E-Z Debt commercial on a White House TV.

   "My fellow Americans, we have just taken the first step toward
   regaining control of our finances," said President Bush at a press
   conference. "Thanks to a joint arrangement between the Treasury
   Department, the Federal Reserve, and E-Z Debt Services of Baltimore,
   we are finally on our way to freedom from debt."

   As of press time, the national debt stands at $6,144,393,982,061.52.

   Under the terms of the consolidation, E-Z Debt Services will repay the
   nation's estimated 45,000 creditors, a majority of whom are foreign
   investors, insurance companies, banks, and other privately held
   entities. In return, the U.S will make a single monthly payment of
   $9.26 billion, adjusted for inflation, to E-Z Debt every month for the
   next 70 years.

   "We are proud to enter into this arrangement with the federal
   government," E-Z Debt spokesman Phil Rizzo told reporters. "We know
   how hard it is when you're buried under a mountain of bills with
   seemingly no way to get out. When you don't know where else to turn,
   E-Z Debt is there to help get you back on your feet."

   The government first became aware of E-Z Debt Services on July 10,
   when Sen. Max Baucus (D-MT) happened to see a commercial for the
   company while watching late-night television. Two days later,
   President Bush saw the same ad during a 3 a.m. M*A*S*H rerun.

   According to White House press secretary Ari Fleischer, Bush was
   sitting at his desk clutching a fistful of past-due notices when he
   saw the ad.

   "He was holding all these unpaid bills, and tons more were piled high
   on his desk, including a three-month-old bill from Lockheed-Martin for
   $5.3 billion worth of jet fighters," said Fleischer, who was in the
   Oval Office working late at the time. "He raised the handfuls of bills
   above his head and shouted, 'I can't take it anymore!' That's when the
   ad came on."

   [5]Enlarge Image Debt-Consolidation Jump 

   Bush poses with a Lockheed-Martin X-35A fighter that was saved from
   repossession, thanks to E-Z Debt.

   After extensive meetings between E-Z Debt officials and the Treasury
   Department, an arrangement was reached which provided a manageable
   payment plan--with no threatening phone calls or military invasions
   from creditor nations.

   Though the House Of Representatives swiftly and decisively approved
   the consolidation plan by a vote of 285 to 103, the Senate took longer
   to rally the necessary support, debating the issue for weeks.

   "I was definitely skeptical about E-Z Debt, as were many of my
   colleagues," Senate Majority Leader Tom Daschle (D-SD) said. "I'd
   heard horror stories about those debt services. England used one to
   get out of a recession in the late '80s, and they're still paying for
   it."

   "But E-Z Debt is different," Daschle continued. "Jim [Smoller], our
   E-Z Debt representative, sat down with me and the other senators and
   really convinced us that debt consolidation was the way to go. He was
   extremely helpful, taking the time to patiently answer all our
   questions. He even gave us a free quote."

   Opponents of the plan charge that it unnecessarily endangers the
   numerous national assets offered as collateral. Among the valuable
   properties being put up are Yellowstone National Park, NASA, and the
   state of Alaska.

   "Holding the nation hostage to a single creditor is hardly preferable
   to the original situation," said Sen. Dianne Feinstein (D-CA) during a
   lengthy Senate debate on the consolidation. "Besides, I am confident
   that if we just trim a few unnecessary expenses from the budget and
   somehow get a little bigger GNP, we can climb out of this hole without
   help. We just need a little more time."

   "Okay, so we mismanaged our money a little bit--who doesn't every now
   and then?" Sen. Bill Frist (R-TN) said. "But that's no reason to
   resort to using one of those get-out-of-debt-now services."

   Despite such opposition, ultimately, the Senate's pro-consolidation
   voices won out.

   "In the end, everybody came to see that E-Z Debt isn't just another
   loan. It's a way to get out of debt without declaring bankruptcy,"
   Daschle said. "Thanks, E-Z Debt. We couldn't have done it without
   you."

