
   OTSEGO, MI--While she may not be making the nightly news or gracing
   the covers of Time and Newsweek, 46-year-old nursing-home worker
   Barbara Louise Huxley is a dedicated, ruthless killer. But in today's
   male-dominated world of remorseless slaughter, Huxley has been forced
   to murder twice as many innocent victims just to gain the public
   exposure and foster the widespread panic her male counterparts
   routinely enjoy.
   [4]Enlarge Image Female Serial Killer Has To Work Twice As Hard To
   Achieve Notoriety 

   Huxley in the nursing home where her hard work and horrifying murders
   have gone unrecognized for years.

   Huxley, who smothered her first elderly patient at the ambitious age
   of 27, got into murder at a time when a woman slowly draining the life
   from a fellow human being was almost unthinkable. Seven more slow and
   methodical choking deaths followed, and though her heartless crimes
   were frequently passed over by local newspapers and her male
   supervisors at the nursing home, Huxley was determined to prove that
   she could be just as brutal and unfeeling as serial killers of the
   opposite sex.

   Today, almost 20 years and countless cold-blooded slayings later,
   Huxley continues to take the lives of others in silence--simply
   because of her gender.

   "After spending so long watching deranged men climb straight to the
   top of the FBI's Most Wanted list, it was hard to get up the energy to
   go into work every day and suffocate another frail diabetic," said
   Huxley, who claims her ability to take human lives without the
   slightest emotional response has gone overlooked by the chauvinistic
   news media and biased higher courts time and time again. "I started to
   think, 'What's the point? What am I doing here?'"

   Added Huxley: "I just want to be treated like any other homicidal
   sociopath."

   Like many young women who simply want the chance to kill as many
   victims as possible before being apprehended by the police, Huxley has
   faced fierce resistance at every turn, whether from police officials,
   eyewitnesses, or often, her own flailing victims.

   "There's nothing more upsetting than strangling someone with surgical
   tubing, only to have them look at you in shock and disbelief," Huxley
   said. "It's like, 'Why are you so surprised? Is it because I'm a
   woman?!'"

   According to Huxley, of the 11 murderers given serial-killer
   distinction in the five years before her arrest, only one was
   female--a woman who was eventually dismissed by a male judge as "not
   possessing the mental facilities required to understand the charges
   against her."

   In addition, the few women who have been granted the distinction have
   received, on average, fewer than seven years of jail time for every 10
   years offered to male serial killers with equivalent body counts.

   Dr. Nancy Trisher, a criminal psychologist at the University of
   Pennsylvania, attributes much of the gender divide to societal
   perceptions of female murderers.

   "People are still uncomfortable with, and often feel threatened by,
   the idea of a woman slitting open a stranger's throat and watching him
   drown in his own blood," Trisher wrote in her most recent book,
   Shattering the Blood-Spattered Glass Ceiling. "Many individuals,
   especially men, consider women too emotional or too passive, and
   assume they are happier drowning their own children at home than going
   out to decapitate vagrants and college students."

   In the meantime, Huxley and a half a dozen other women like her must
   continue to burn and mutilate their victims without the media and
   law-enforcement attention their gruesome acts rightfully deserve.

   "Even when the news finally gets around to reporting on us, it's only
   to talk about how 'rare' it is to see women do the awful things we
   do," Huxley said. "It's never because we're just good murderers."

   As she patiently waits for the long-delayed public outcry over her
   unspeakable crimes, Huxley can only hope she will soon secure the kind
   of lasting infamy already enjoyed by such men as Jeffrey Dahmer,
   Charles Manson, and Dennis Rader. An inspiration to every young girl
   with no regard for life, Huxley dreams of a day when society looks at
   her and sees not just a woman, but a bloodthirsty monster.

