
   CHICAGO--According to a groundbreaking new study published Monday in
   The Journal Of The American Statistical Association, somewhere on the
   planet someone is totally doing it at this very moment.
   [4]Enlarge Image Scientists 

   Scientists told reporters someone could be doing it right next door.

   "Of the 6.7 billion inhabitants of Earth, approximately 3.5 billion
   have reached sexual maturity," said Dr. Jerome Carver, a mathematics
   professor at the University of Chicago and lead author of the study.
   "From a statistical perspective, it simply stands to reason that at
   least two of these inhabitants are totally going at it right now.
   Like, as we speak."

   "But it's probably way more than that," Carver added. "Like at least a
   hundred."

   The multidiscipline study, which tapped leading experts in several
   fields, including reproduction and population sciences, found
   overwhelming evidence that there is never even a second when someone
   is not doing it.

   An analysis of the data, based on a new statistical model referred to
   as "Rauchembauer's Overlap," indicates that, given the sheer number of
   people in the world, by the time the first set of people is done doing
   it, someone else has already begun getting it on.

   In addition, the findings suggest that there is a "good, to very good"
   chance that someone is doing it close by.

   "The nearer you get to major metropolitan areas, the more likely you
   are to be in proximity to those making it," said California Institute
   of Technology probability theorist Howard Bergsson, who contributed to
   the report. "For example, we're in Chicago, a city of three million
   people. Someone is probably doing it right down the street, or maybe
   even somewhere in this building."
   [5]Enlarge Image Report 

   "And even if they're not, you have to keep in mind that it's nighttime
   in England right now," Bergsson added. "So someone is, in all
   likelihood, doing it over there."

   While exciting in its own right, the new revelation has also lent
   credibility to several long-held theories, including the idea that
   those doing it are either partially or totally naked, and that the
   doing it itself may in large part involve a process known as
   "humping."

   Citing the global population boom, Carver went on to demonstrate a
   strong correlation between rising birth rates and the new doing-it
   probability model.

   "Roughly 350,000 babies are born every day," said Carver, who is
   currently working on a new report entitled "Making It: A Comprehensive
   Survey Of Sexy Stuff Happening All Over The Place." "And how does that
   happen? I'm telling you, people are just getting it on like
   crazy--just all the time."

   "Think about it," Carver continued.

   Carver said the most important aspect of the study is that it accounts
   for variables often overlooked in earlier inquiries, an error which
   may have resulted in a much lower estimation of the worldwide
   frequency of going at it.

   "Other studies addressing this phenomenon made the faulty assumption
   that people only do it in bed," Carver said. "But people can do it
   anywhere. Sometimes even in the shower. Or the basement."

   According to observers, the study's secondary findings are in some
   ways even more surprising: Given the fact that not everyone goes all
   the way all the time, the report predicts that there are at least four
   times as many people currently frenching or getting to second base
   than there are doing it.

   "The number of people being felt up right now is astronomical," Carver
   said.

   Though the evidence presented by the study appears to be irrefutable,
   it has already found its share of detractors within the scientific
   community.

   "No way," said Dr. Lane Keilor, a professor of theoretical mathematics
   at the University of Rochester in New York. "Gross."

