
   NEW YORK--Flanked by Food Network president Brooke Johnson and
   cooking-show host Rachael Ray, Commissioner Gary Bettman announced
   yesterday that the NHL has opted out of its contract with the Versus
   cable channel (formerly the Outdoor Life Network) and has reached a
   long-term broadcasting deal with the Food Network starting in the
   2007-08 season.
   [4]Enlarge Image NHL And Food Network 

   "In all my years as commissioner, I have learned that our diverse
   group of fans and players all enjoy food of some sort. Italian,
   French, barbecue, quick-and-easy 30-minute meals--you name it, one or
   more of them eat it," said Bettman, adding that Iron Chef French host
   Hiroyuki Sakai will join play-by-play announcer Mike "Doc" Emrick and
   analyst Brian Engblom to form a new lead announcing team for all Food
   Network games. "This partnership has been a long time coming. If the
   Food Network would have been around in 1991, we would have left ESPN
   in a heartbeat."

   "It's great to know we will be on television next year," Bettman
   added, smiling as the NHL's new studio team, consisting of Rachael Ray
   as head hockey anchor and Bill Clement as game analyst, collaborated
   in an attempt to equate the offsides penalty to "zesting up" a
   pan-seared T-bone steak. "Thanks, Food Network."

   Though Bettman maintained that the Food Network was always the
   league's first choice, sources close to the commissioner confirmed
   that the NHL also considered broadcasting games on E!, the Golf
   Channel, and Cartoon Network before eventually deciding to go with the
   network offering the best combination of financial incentives and
   airtime.

   "We also thought the lead-in programs on Versus, especially those that
   focused on bull-riding, bass fishing, and violent contact sports, were
   not entirely compatible with the image of the league," Bettman said.
   "Now, hockey games will follow Emeril Live, Feasting On Asphalt, and
   The Hungry Detective, which, as you can plainly see, are a better fit.
   Also, we are paying the Food Network much less money to broadcast our
   games."

   According to terms of the deal, the Food Network will schedule
   broadcasts of over 50 full-length hockey games and will carry both the
   Eastern and Western Conference Semi-Finals, as well as Games 4 through
   7 of the Stanley Cup Finals. The only exception, Bettman said, would
   be made for Rachael Ray, who appears on television roughly three times
   more than the NHL. In the case of Ray experiencing a scheduling
   conflict, hockey games will be postponed and rescheduled at Ray's
   convenience.

   "We liked the idea of having hockey because it has two halftimes,"
   said Food Network president Johnson, adding that the first game on the
   channel will feature the ceremonial dropping of an inaugural homemade
   Italian meatball at center ice by honorary referee Mario Batali. "Our
   debut coverage will include a halftime show hosted by Giada De
   Laurentiis, who will recap the game's events while guiding you through
   the preparation of Sicilian penne with swordfish and eggplant. Or, if
   you are in the mood for something more immediate, on-ice reporter
   Paula Deen will spend timeouts showing you certain tactics to enhance
   the flavor of your traditional southwestern dip."

   Though she stated that she didn't want to give anything away, Johnson
   said that the network's first hockey-related profile will focus on
   Sidney Crosby eating veal and creamed spinach prepared by Roker On The
   Road host Al Roker. Other hockey players now contractually obligated
   to make appearances on shows include Chris Drury on Food 911, Martin
   Brodeur on Calorie Commando, and Alexander Ovechkin on Dinner:
   Impossible.

   The new broadcasting deal has some sportswriters saying the move will
   make hockey even more irrelevant, while others believe this is a clear
   step up for the league.

   "I watch the Food Network far more than I watch hockey, and I think
   most sports fans feel the same way," said Boston Globe sports
   columnist Bob Ryan. "My favorite program is Food Nation With Bobby
   Flay. So I'll definitely watch that, and then maybe stick around to
   watch part of a period if the Bruins are playing. Everybody wins
   here."

