
   SAN BRUNO, CA--In an effort to connect with younger voters and tap
   into the immense popularity of the video-sharing website, Democrat and
   Republican candidates participated in the first-ever presidential
   debates shown on YouTube to at least 11 viewers.
   [4]Enlarge Image Youtube Debate 

   An estimated 50 percent of the video's viewers clicked on the link by
   accident.

   The video debates--which received one comment, two stars, and was
   favorited by no one--featured candidates answering a variety of
   viewer-generated questions ranging from health care to the Iraq war,
   and racked up 4,881,990 fewer views than a 56-second video of a sleepy
   cat posted the same day.

   "Don't tase me, bro!" an unnamed University of Florida student said in
   a video that captured the attention of college-age men and women
   across the country. "Oww! Oww! Oww!"

   Despite being highlighted on YouTube's main page for the three weeks
   preceding and following each debate, the two videos remain among the
   site's least watched, receiving five fewer views than an identical
   debate video that was sped up and set to the popular novelty song
   "Yakety Sax." Nevertheless, 2008 Democratic candidate John Edwards
   reportedly called the debates a "success for modern elections" in an
   e-mail to CollegeHumor.com, urging the popular comedy outlet to please
   post the video somewhere, anywhere on its website.

   Although Republican frontrunner Rudolph Giuliani touted his ability to
   bring in literally hundreds of new viewers to November's GOP debate,
   the Federal Election Commission ruled that his campaign misled voters
   and broke federal law when it tagged the video as "Lindsay Lohan
   Britney Spears VMAs Boobs The Notebook Kiss Scene Juggling Letterman
   Spiderman." The FEC also discounted several accidental views resulting
   from searches for "Hilary Duff," "Dennis the Menace," and "Daily Show
   Republican Debate."

   While official YouTube estimates put the debates' total number of hits
   at just under a dozen, some candidates claimed the statistics had been
   miscalculated and should be rounded up to 13 to include the time
   Democratic candidate Joe Biden was unable to view the video because
   his dial-up Internet connection was too slow.

   Leaders from both parties said they were already looking forward to
   holding similar debates in 2008, and that the next round will feature
   expanded interactive features for YouTube members, more candid
   discussions between candidates, and a surprise ending involving Mentos
   and Diet Coke.

