
   WASHINGTON, DC--Responding to concerns that time is running out and
   deals like this don't come around every day, the U.S. Senate held an
   emergency session Tuesday to approve an appropriations bill that would
   allocate $460 billion toward the nation's can't-miss Labor Day weekend
   sales.
   [4]Enlarge Image Senate Allocates 

   Senate Appropriations Committee chair Sen. Robert Byrd (D-WV)
   producing what he deems "hard evidence" of impending Labor Day
   discounts.

   Rushed through the Senate in the middle of the night, S. 9037, also
   known as the Must Act Now Act, authorizes the federal government to
   take full advantage of sensational savings on select and already
   reduced merchandise. Besides earmarking $250 billion alone for
   much-needed back-to-school clothing, the bill also provides for the
   purchase of marked-down washing machines, dishwashers, bedding, bath
   towels, oscillating fans, and much, much more.

   "We have credible evidence of sales, sales, sales," said
   Appropriations Committee chair Sen. Robert Byrd (D-WV), who stressed
   Congress' essential role in raising public awareness of discounts too
   great to pass up. "In all my years in the Senate, I have never seen a
   bargain blowout quite like this. I would be doing a grave disservice
   to the American people if I did not fully acknowledge that there has
   never been a better time to buy."

   The Senate Subcommittee on Bargain Hunting spent several months
   investigating Sunday newspaper supplements and in-store sales fliers
   and concluded that the most serious deals would most likely take place
   on or around September 3. Legislators returned early from their August
   recess to vote an overwhelming 84-9 in favor of the bill, arguing that
   it would be fiscally irresponsible to miss the chance to take 10 to 75
   percent off children's and misses' apparel, casual footwear, matching
   sleeper sofas and love seats, and the lowest prices of the season on
   housewares, including unbeatable clearances on most KitchenAid
   cookware and appliances.
   [5]Enlarge Image Senate Allocates Jump 

   The Snooz-N-Save "Mattress Man" during testimony before the Senate
   Subcommittee on Bargain Hunting in June.

   "According to this circular obtained by members of my staff, all
   summer sale merchandise is to be discounted an additional 30 percent,"
   said bill sponsor Sen. Bill Nelson (D-FL), holding aloft what appeared
   to be a colorful newspaper insert. "If this information is reliable,
   and I believe it is, then I say there's no point in the public paying
   full price for hot summertime must-haves like garden tools, Weber
   grills, all Coppertone and Banana Boat-brand sunscreen, and family
   swimwear, when, come Labor Day, they'll be a virtual steal."

   "Look at these Rockport-brand oxfords I'm wearing," Nelson added,
   lifting one leg and pointing to his foot. "I bought them at the last
   Labor Day sale for an amazing $59.99, over half off the original
   price. Plus, we really need new sheets, and now is the time to buy. As
   a nation, we can't afford not to."

   Though President Bush is expected to sign the spending-stimulus
   package into law, opponents of the bill continue their strenuous
   objections to the enormous expenditures, insisting that the nation
   already has everything it needs and then some. Others say that the
   2007 federal budget allotted no money for amazing sales spectaculars,
   and that the Senate could wait until next year to allocate the
   necessary funds, since the country won't have to pay for its purchases
   for a full six months anyhow.

   "Why do we need 200,000 deck chairs?" asked Sen. Pat Roberts (R-KS), a
   leading critic of "runaway spending," who also claimed that many
   discounts will not be immediately felt since they are in mail-in
   rebate form and will not be received for another eight to 12 weeks.
   "The country already has perfectly good patio furniture."

