
   NASHUA, NH--Politically engaged citizen David Haas, 25, described by
   friends and acquaintances as a "big democracy geek," even votes in
   primaries.

     Huge democracy geek

   Haas casts his vote in some obscure Sept. 10 election.

   "I can understand voting in the big elections, like for president or
   governor, or maybe even senator," longtime friend Gregg Becher said
   Monday. "But David votes in, like, mayoral and county-supervisor
   elections. How dorky is that?"

   The right to vote, as guaranteed in the Constitution, is among the
   hallmarks of the American democratic system. But Haas has exercised
   his franchise rights to an embarrassing extreme, voting in every
   federal, state, and local election since turning 18.

   "Normally, David's a reliable, punctual employee," said Dorothy
   Raubel, owner of Raubel Garden Center, where Haas has worked for the
   past seven years. "But then there's that occasional Tuesday morning in
   April or November when he calls in saying he'll be late to work. It's
   a strange habit, but we've all grown accustomed to it by now."

   Haas prides himself on being an informed voter, making sure to
   familiarize himself with candidates' positions before casting a vote.
   A self-described "independent" who tends to favor Democratic
   candidates, he can summarize the basic position of both major parties
   on most issues. As a result, Haas has endured the mockery and derision
   of those around him.

   "On Sept. 10, he showed up late to work, and you could just tell he'd
   been voting," coworker Mike Summers said. "He was holding something in
   his hand, and we were like, 'Hey, Haasenpfeffer, whatcha got there?'
   He said it was the League of Women Voters candidate guide. So Rob
   [Mularkey] says, 'League of Women Voters? Now I know why you vote so
   much--you want to horn in on that hot women-voter action!' David
   didn't even smile; he just got all huffy and said the guide was from
   the morning paper and that copies were available to the public."

   Richard Prohaska, Haas' next-door neighbor, can attest to Haas'
   strange dedication to the American political process. Over the years,
   Prohaska said he has seen him get into numerous doorstep discussions
   with campaign workers and canvassing local politicians.

   "About two months ago, some alderwoman who was up for reelection was
   going door-to-door passing out leaflets," Prohaska said. "I took one,
   thanked her, and closed the door as fast as I could. About 30 minutes
   later, I'm backing the car out of the garage to wash it, and there's
   David talking to her on his porch. I go to get the hose, and when I
   come back, he's actually inviting her into his home. I was half-done
   waxing when she finally came out. Either they had one hell of a
   quickie, or David cares deeply about local politics. Knowing him, it
   was definitely the latter."

   Though it's not clear why Haas insists on voting in every election,
   there is no shortage of speculation.

   "My guess is, it's his way of hiding from the real world," said
   Jennifer Thorsten, Haas' sister. "He's always been interested in
   politics. He was on the debate team in high school and got a B.A. in
   poli sci in college. I've tried to get him to skip an election, but he
   never does. He says that only by exercising our democratic freedoms do
   we keep our democracy healthy and vital. Whatever, David."

