
   NEW ORLEANS--Mere moments after hoisting the crystal national
   championship trophy, Tigers coach Les Miles announced that LSU had
   made the decision to "go out on top" and retire after almost 150 years
   as a public university.

   "Believe me, beating the Ohio State Buckeyes was tough, but coming to
   this decision was much tougher," said Miles, who said he reached the
   decision after a Christmas day meeting with LSU chancellor John
   O'Keefe, university president John Lombardi, and Tigers quarterback
   Matt Flynn. "But I really feel that after winning our second national
   chamionship in five years, Louisiana State University and Agricultural
   and Mechanical College has nothing left to prove--to others or to
   ourselves."

   "There's not a doubt in my mind that this university will be as
   successful at whatever it chooses to do in its private life as it was
   playing football," Miles added. "The lessons LSU learned in becoming
   national champions will go with us for the rest of our lives, no
   matter where life takes us."

   Though established in 1859, Louisiana State University did not play
   football for more than 30 years, finally giving the game a try in
   1893. Even then, success was long in coming, and the school did not
   win a national championship until 1958.

   "We don't have the advantages of a lot of other institutions of higher
   learning, but I'd put our love for football up there with any of
   them," Chancellor O'Keefe said Tuesday. "But I believe every college,
   university, what have you, has to be honest with itself and realize
   there's a time to bow out gracefully. And LSU's time is now."

   "I'm overjoyed about the championship, and I've enjoyed being a part
   of what makes this university so great," said Flynn, who was 19 of 26
   for 174 yards and four touchdowns in what turned out to be his
   school's final public appearance. "That's what makes this decision so
   bittersweet, for me and for all the other players, coaches, students,
   professors, advisers, administrators, everybody. But when you're done,
   you're done."

   Flynn, like most of LSU's 34.000 students, intends to spend a week or
   so enjoying the victory and celebrating the championship before moving
   out of his soon-to-be-demolished dormitory and pursuing work in the
   private sector.

   "There were so many good times and so much great football with so many
   wonderful people that I have no regrets," said LSU architecture
   professor Marsha Cuddeback. "Sure, I'll miss teaching here. But
   there's not a doubt in my mind this is the right thing to do."

   "You get to a point where there's just nothing else to accomplish,"
   President Lombardi told reporters Tuesday, in between completing the
   paperwork that would cancel the spring semester and arranging for the
   sale of LSU's 2,100-acre campus. "From here on out, we at the
   university would just be padding our career stats. That's not how we
   want to be remembered."

   "When people think of LSU, we want them to think of a class act,"
   Lombardi said. "We want them to say, 'There's a school that really
   knew when it was time to walk away.'"

