
   WASHINGTON, DC--The National Anti- Quartering Association, America's
   foremost Third Amendment rights group, held its annual gala in
   Washington Monday to honor 191 consecutive years of advocating the
   protection of private homes and property against the unlawful boarding
   of military personnel.
   [4]Enlarge Image The National Anti-Quartering Association 

   "This is a proud day for quarters-owners everywhere," said the
   organization's president, Charles Davison, in his keynote address.
   "Year after year, we have sent a loud and clear message to the federal
   government and to anyone else who would attack our unassailable
   rights: Hands off our cottages, livery stables, and haylofts."

   The NAQA was created in 1816 in response to repeated violations of the
   Third Amendment during the War of 1812. The organization quickly grew
   in influence and cites its vigilance as the primary reason why the
   amendment has only been litigated once in a federal court since the
   Bill of Rights was ratified. The organization is also arguably the
   country's most powerful political lobby; every politician elected
   since 1866 has fully supported Third Amendment rights.

   "The framers of the Constitution provided the American people with the
   right to have their homes free of troops unless Congress mandates
   otherwise during a time of war," Davison said. "Thanks to our tireless
   efforts, six generations of civilians have never known the cruelty and
   duress of quartering unruly foot soldiers."

   Davison recalled the "dark days" of 1982, when the federal case of
   Engblom v. Carey threatened to strip Americans of their fundamental
   Third Amendment freedoms. The ruling by the Second Circuit Court of
   Appeals acknowledged that the State of New York had indeed violated
   the Third Amendment rights of the plaintiffs. The case, according to
   Davison, was "a chilling reminder of how even an established
   200-year-old right hangs by a slender thread."

   "I don't think people fully understand how close we came to completely
   losing such a basic right," Davison said. "If the Second Circuit had
   ruled otherwise, we'd be living in a world in which soldiers would be
   quartering amok upon our very hearthstones."

   Davison expressed pride in the NAQA's grassroots involvement at the
   local level, citing the association's direct-mailing campaigns and its
   fully staffed regional centers where citizens can report Third
   Amendment rights abuses. The NAQA also holds quartering-safety
   seminars for citizens interested in learning how to effectively defend
   their households against U.S. troops seeking shelter.

   Davison reiterated the organization's promise to oppose pro-quartering
   legislation should any ever be proposed.

   "Keep the fat hands of soldiers out of America's larders!" Davison
   said to rousing applause. He was quoting the NAQA's familiar slogan,
   which can be found on T-shirts, bumper stickers, and other merchandise
   sold on the group's website.

   Davison ended his address by warning of the dangers of the NAQA
   resting on its laurels.

   "Pro-quartering advocates are waiting for just the right moment to
   stick a bunch of troops in our homes," Davison said. "Well, I say to
   them that we will never allow this to happen. You can count on the
   true patriots of the NAQA to ensure that no chickens and livestock
   will be appropriated, and private stores of salt, brandy, candles, and
   vinegar will stay firmly where they belong: in civilian hands."

   The NAQA is known for its quick and aggressive mobilization when it
   believes Third Amendment rights are at risk, and has rushed to the
   defense of homeowners it believes are being illegally coerced into
   housing American soldiers. Last month, 200 NAQA members marched on a
   private residence in Fairfax, VA after receiving a tip that the owners
   were being victimized by three Navy seamen demanding prolonged
   quartering. They ended their demonstration, however, when it was
   discovered that the sailors were brothers on shore leave visiting
   their parents.

   Davison, 49, has headed the NAQA since January, replacing longtime
   president Lawrence Frost. Frost, 58, left the organization to chair
   the Citizens Committee for the Right to Drink, a 21st Amendment rights
   group committed to the continued legal status of alcohol for Americans
   of drinking age.

