
   HOUSTON--The intense pressure and scrutiny that comes with attempting
   to break Major League Baseball's all-time hit-batsman mark, a
   once-thought untouchable record that has stood at 287 for over a
   century, came to a head yesterday when Craig Biggio lashed out against
   the media, blaming an avalanche of news coverage and reporters'
   ceaseless questioning for his recent hit-by-pitch slump.
   [4]Enlarge Image Craig Biggio 

   Biggio has not been struck by a pitch since July and has stalled at
   285, while Hughie Jennings' awe-inspiring, much-revered record--set
   during a playing career that spanned the decade from 1893 to
   1903--seems to be getting further and further out of reach.

   "You guys perpetuated this by comparing me to Hughie day in and day
   out," said a chain-smoking Biggio, showing reporters from over 50
   media outlets the bundles of hate mail he has received from baseball
   fans. "Listen to these people: 'Quit now before you break the hearts
   of fans everywhere, Craig.' 'Hey Craig Bitch, I'll kill you and your
   family if you break the record.' 'Jennings did it without an arm
   guard.' Do you think they had even heard of this guy before you people
   had my countdown on the front page every day? Jesus Christ!"

   "More than anything, I just want to be hit by three more pitches so
   all of this will go away," said Biggio, who claims he has not slept in
   weeks and has developed multiple stomach ulcers. "Now I know why Don
   Baylor quit at 267."

   Though Biggio has refrained from comment on what national media
   outlets have dubbed "The Chase" for the majority of the season, last
   night's outburst was more than likely a reaction to a special guest
   editorial in this week's Sports Illustrated. The Tom Verducci-penned
   piece stated that, no matter what numbers eventually appeared in the
   "total hit by pitch" column, Jennings and his "magical" 51 hit-batsman
   season of 1894 could never be dethroned as baseball's all-time
   hit-by-pitch king.
     Craig Biggio card

   All-time hit-by-pitch king Jennings

   "Craig Biggio has played nearly 10 seasons more than Jennings--that
   means he has had the opportunity to be hit by hundreds of thousands
   more pitches," Verducci writes. "It's a regrettable fact that, like it
   or not, baseball fans will have to accept that Craig Biggio will
   ultimately be hit by a baseball more times than Hughie Jennings. But
   he will never, ever bring the same amount of excitement to being hit
   by a pitch that Hughie did."

   The final line of Verducci's article read, "Craig Biggio: All-Time
   Hit-Batsman Leader. Just doesn't sound right."

   According to ESPN baseball analyst Tim Kurkjian, the main difference
   between Jennings and Biggio is that, in Jennings' playing days, he was
   universally adored by fans in all eight baseball cities. Kurkjian
   notes that, perhaps unfairly, Biggio's attempt to break the record has
   only been embraced in Houston, evidenced by the enormous "Hit By
   Pitch" countdown sign in left field and by the fireworks that are set
   off every time Biggio is beaned.

   "True, Biggio is booed in every major-league ballpark other than his
   own," Kurkjian said. "But this is not just a historic record we're
   talking about here. It's a fairytale of a record, a romantic ideal
   almost, a high-water mark set by one of baseball's most well-known
   figures. Naturally, there is going to be a backlash."

   "And as far as I'm concerned, the arm-guard argument can be saved for
   a later time. The key for Biggio is to block everything out, play
   Craig Biggio baseball, and wait for his pitch. The wild fastballs and
   the non-breaking curveballs will eventually come if he's patient."

   With over 50 games remaining, Biggio has ample time to break the
   record, though there are several tangible factors that can be blamed
   for his recent stall. Most significant is the simple fact that the
   closer he gets to the immortal mark, pitchers around the league have
   been throwing to, instead of at, Biggio.

   "No one wants to be the guy who throws that record 288th bean-ball,"
   New York Mets pitcher Tom Glavine said. "From this point on, when
   Craig comes up to bat, he is only going to get pitches he can hit.
   Still, I am sure some pitcher will make a mistake, and serve up a wild
   pitch on a silver platter. When that happens, Craig will definitely
   know to lay into it."

   "After all," Glavine said, "he is one of the all-time greats."

