
   NEW YORK--As winter tightens its grip on the nation, hockey fans from
   coast to coast are breaking out their team sweaters for the first time
   in what seems like ages, eagerly anticipating attending their first
   professional hockey game since the NHL's lockout began quite some time
   ago.
   [4]Enlarge Image Nation Gears Up R 

   "Oh, hockey's back? Well, I'm glad they finally got that whole thing
   resolved," said North Carolina resident Max Sherwood, adding that once
   the ponds of Raleigh freeze over, he would definitely consider going
   to a game. "I remember I used to see it on TV now and then, but not
   for a while, come to think of it. It's nice they're going to have that
   again."

   "I hope we can beat the Russians again, at any rate," Sherwood added.

   To fans of the NHL, there is nothing that comes close to hockey, and
   no doubt its sudden disappearance from the world of competitive sports
   some time in the last few years came as a crushing disappointment to
   the hockey faithful. But with the new year upon us, those die-hard
   fans will soon be thrilled by the breathtaking exploits of luminaries
   such as Mark Messier, Mario Lemieux, Gordie Howe, Paul Coffey, Barry
   Melrose, the Quebec Nordiques, and Wayne "The Great" Gretzky. And, as
   always, the NHL hopes that newcomers to the sport might find it fills
   the void between the college bowl games and the NBA All-Star Game.

   "I still can't believe they skate the entire time," said Phoenix
   resident Brent Quigley. "I've never managed to actually see more than
   a couple games back when they used to show them, and I've never been
   to one, because it's a pretty long drive to Los Angeles. But it's
   colorful, what with the fights and all, right?"

   Pittsburgh, a major hockey hotbed, is reportedly abuzz with hockey-mad
   fans, as the local Pittsburgh players are once again expected to make
   another run at the elusive championship.

   "You do remember that we actually won one a while ago? I'm pretty sure
   we did," said outspoken superstar Jagr, who, before the lockout, many
   hockey insiders claimed was on pace to break an important league
   record or records. "And yes, I think we are doing okay so far. It's
   early," added Jagr, apparently referring to his team's preseason
   record, after being asked if his team had a chance to win the Stanley
   Trophy.

   Though the league promises that rule changes made during the lockout
   will promote a faster, higher-scoring style of play that should
   attract Americans to the sport, the NHL may still have difficulty
   competing with other nationally televised athletic events that have
   traditionally earned a larger audience, such as professional football,
   college football, arena football, professional basketball, college
   basketball, women's professional basketball, NASCAR season highlight
   retrospectives, motocross, the And-1 Mix Tape Basketball Tour, NASCAR
   season previews, Monday Night RAW, professional bass fishing, the
   upcoming pay-per-view Oscar de la Hoya fight, ESPN Classic, the
   Ultimate Fighting Championship and its accompanying reality show,
   amateur bass fishing, highlights of Staten Island Yankees workouts,
   and college hockey.

   "We certainly think Americans have forgiven us for the lockout by now,
   and will continue to attend our games," said NHL commissioner Gary
   Bettman, who was also acting commissioner during the work stoppage
   that resulted in the cancellation of hockey's equivalent of the world
   series for the first time in 90 years.

   "It was certainly a difficult time for this league, but I think last
   season showed everyone we have what it takes to get our fans' hearts
   back," Bettman added, evidently speaking of the high standard of play
   preceding the strike.

   Although the NHL has yet to sign a broadcast package contract with a
   major television station, most networks say they are committed to
   giving out the more important hockey scores if time permits. ESPN, the
   last national network to feature a comprehensive schedule of NHL
   games, has said it will continue to report results of games during the
   popular Did You Know? segment, and would consider showing any Game 7
   of a championship series if the NHL could afford the airtime.

