
   ANNAPOLIS, MD--Despite years of diplomatic stalemate in the Mideast
   crisis, Syrian officials appeared eager to mend troubled Arab-Israeli
   relations this week by participating in a second round of U.S.-led
   peace talks, which feature representatives from every country in the
   region, as well as a complimentary continental breakfast in the hotel
   lobby.

   "We are attending this conference in the interest of peace, and intend
   to take full advantage of the opportunities afforded by this historic
   summit," Syrian deputy foreign minister Faisal Mekdad said Tuesday. "I
   understand that a total of five different beverage options, including
   milk, tea, and assorted juices, will be available free of charge."
   [4]Enlarge Image Syria 

   Syrian delegates maintained their position on the so-called "Danish
   situation."

   Now in its second day, the summit has reportedly been a success for
   the Syrians, who described themselves as "optimistic" and "full" and
   are already pointing to a number of positive developments, including
   fresh pastries and a new policy of unlimited coffee refills.

   A number of observers applauded Syria's apparent commitment to peace
   after Syrian president Bashar al-Assad, who selected a raspberry
   Danish and small cup of vanilla yogurt sprinkled with granola from the
   ice-filled bin in the hotel reception area, laid out his country's
   goals for the five-day summit.

   "This is a chance for us to get something truly worthwhile out of the
   arduous peace process," al-Assad said. "Now is the time to put aside
   petty concerns and take advantage of this incredible generosity. The
   continental breakfast is only available for a limited time each
   morning, so we must be focused and diligent about getting down to the
   lobby before hotel staff remove all the doughnuts at 10:30."

   According to the State Department, the first day's
   discussions--centered around Palestinian statehood and security along
   Israel's border with the Gaza Strip--went relatively smoothly, though
   the Syrian delegation did not appear until 90 minutes after the
   scheduled 9 a.m. start. Upon their arrival, however, the Syrians
   introduced themselves to their international counterparts and, as a
   measure of goodwill, offered them croissants, small wedges of
   grapefruit, and toast with jelly packets.

   "We are encouraged by the Syrians' willingness to help promote freedom
   in the region," U.S. spokesman Sean McCormack said. "We just hope they
   will be ready to start talks before 10:31 tomorrow morning."

   The meetings were not without setbacks. Small arguments broke out
   sporadically throughout the day over the status of Jerusalem,
   Palestinian refugees, and the Kuwaiti ambassador taking the last three
   cream cheese packets.

   "We deserve unfettered access to the cream cheese," said the head of
   the Syrian parliament's foreign relations committee, Suleiman Haddad,
   addressing a group of delegates assembled near the milk and cream
   table. "This must not be taken away from us. It is unacceptable. What
   will we put on this bagel?"

   Tensions were relieved by some Syrian representatives who took a more
   conciliatory tone, pointing out that it's nearly impossible to find
   good bagels in their native country at all, while expressing hope that
   a more equitable cream cheese-sharing arrangement could be arrived at
   the following morning.
   [5]Enlarge Image Coffee 

   Syria's president and prime minister hold an emergency meeting near
   the coffee.

   In Tehran, meanwhile, Iranian president Mahmoud Ahmadinejad, who was
   not invited to the talks, was highly critical of the summit, claiming
   that the European-style breakfast was indicative of a pro-Israel bias.

   "It is quite obvious that the Annapolis summit will offer little real
   substance to those in attendance," Ahmadinejad said. "The little
   single-serving boxes of cereal are not even sizable enough to
   constitute a real meal."

   Nevertheless, many within the State Department said they were
   encouraged to witness a number of delegates working together to clean
   up a cup of spilled coffee. At one point, the Israeli prime minister
   even offered to give up extra napkins to Syria's president in order to
   stop the liquid from flowing over the side of the counter.

   In comments made to the Syrian state newspaper, Syrian prime minister
   Muhammad Naji al-Otari said he was confident there was even more to
   achieve during the conference.

   "I am pleased to report that there will be a variety of instant
   oatmeal flavors being offered in the near future," al-Otari said. "I
   am certainly looking forward to learning more about the apples and
   cinnamon, maple and brown sugar, and the plain oatmeal flavors."

   While the United States organized an opening-night gala to welcome the
   participating ambassadors, the Syrians did not attend the event,
   claiming they had to go to bed early in order to get plenty of sleep
   for some "very important business" they had to attend to at 7 a.m. the
   following day.

