
   DAYTON, OH--In a decision that senior partner Bob Davis called "long
   overdue," local law firm Davis, Cassini & Snyder confirmed Tuesday its
   intentions to purchase one of those big leather chairs--the
   burgundy-colored ones with the gold buttons and the thick, fancy
   armrests--sometime in the upcoming weeks.
   [4]Enlarge Image The chair 

   The chair, with the gold buttons and everything.

   Despite the prior acquisition of several big wooden legal bookshelves,
   a half-dozen of those gold-colored desk lamps with the green plastic
   panels covering the light bulbs, and several portraits of
   serious-looking lawyers and judges from the 1800s, the office has
   reportedly lacked a big leather chair since its opening in 2005.

   "We are eagerly anticipating the arrival of the chair," junior partner
   John Cassini told reporters. "As a respectable law firm, the office of
   Davis, Cassini & Snyder needs an expensive leather chair that doesn't
   swivel, raise, or lower, but just sits there in the office."

   Cassini stated that he couldn't describe the exact name or brand of
   chair he was referring to, but confirmed that he had sat in a similar
   chair before. He further insisted that, as a registered member of the
   bar, he would "definitely know one if [he] saw it," and that a lot of
   law offices have them.

   The decision to purchase the chair, office sources said, came after
   Bob Davis made a visit to the nearby law firm Berkman & Berkman. Davis
   reported back to his associates that the rival firm had one of those
   leather chairs where the material "poofs out" due to the indents in
   the fabric, thereby creating what Davis referred to as the chair's
   signature diamond-shaped leather pouches.

   "It also had the gold buttons that embroider the armrests," said
   Davis, who later went on to note Berkman & Berkman's recent courtroom
   success. "And the [big leather] chair had that claw-foot design on its
   legs."

   "Great chair," he added.

   Davis told reporters that, as senior partner, the final decision on
   the chair would ultimately go through him, but that he planned to
   delegate the responsibility of locating the chair to the firm's
   administrative assistant, Kathy Plaitano.

   "I told Kathy that if she is having trouble finding exactly what we
   want, she should watch The Firm or Philadelphia," Davis said. "Those
   movies definitely have the kind of chairs we're talking about."

   According to members of the legal team, even if the chair Plaitano
   finds fulfills the requirements for both color and seat width, the
   firm will not, under any circumstance, accept a leather chair that has
   metal legs, is on wheels, or has a medium-height back.

   In addition, the attorneys were adamant that any potential client who
   sits in the chair should "sink in just a little" so that only the
   individual's head would be visible if someone was to approach the
   chair from behind.

   "It has to be that kind of chair," Cassini said. "We won't settle for
   anything less."

   Though the attorneys unanimously agreed to purchase the chair,
   concerns have been raised as to the chair's ultimate location in the
   office.

   "If I know Davis, he'll want to put it in the waiting room next to the
   fern," Snyder said. "But if it's the kind of chair I'm thinking of, I
   think we should put it across from my desk to give my clients a nice
   place to sit during their appointments."

   Davis and Cassini refused to respond to Snyder's statement, but when
   pressed for comment stated that it might be in the law firm's best
   interest to purchase more than one chair.

