
   YOUR SCHOOL--No one at your new college could give even two shits
   about the girlfriend you left back home, a special Onion investigation
   confirmed Monday.
   [4]Enlarge Image students 

   Students talking about things much more interesting than some girl you
   miss.

   "That guy [you] acts like he's the only person in history to be
   separated from his high school girlfriend after leaving for college,"
   said your roommate, who, after examining a photo prominently displayed
   on your dorm-room desk, described your girlfriend as being "not even
   that hot." "I'm sorry, but some of us are trying to actually start the
   next chapter of our lives here in college, so forgive me if I am not
   exactly on the edge of my seat about the unfolding drama of somebody's
   high school love."

   Since relocating to your new home in the dorms earlier this month,
   sources report, you have gone on and on about your 17-year-old
   girlfriend at every possible opportunity. Worse, you have done so
   without apparent regard for the fact that your utterly clichéd
   scenario could not be less interesting to your fellow students, most
   of whom have spent their time hooking up with each other instead of
   mooning over some boring high school chick they're probably never
   going to see again after the next few weeks.
     Sources No Girl

   Your girlfriend

   Students interviewed by The Onion confirmed no one cares that "this is
   the first time [you've] tried to make a serious go of a long-distance
   relationship," that "[your girlfriend] is totally worth it because
   she's the most special person [you've] ever known," or about any of
   the other things you keep going on about to anyone within earshot.

   When asked to rate their interest level in your high school
   girlfriend, an overwhelming 93 percent of your fellow students
   responded "zero." Furthermore, when asked to list topics they would
   rather pay attention to than your girlfriend, they cited subjects
   ranging from dorm-safety procedures to cafeteria meal-card
   distribution policy to Earth Science 101.

   According to the campus-wide survey, interest was similarly
   nonexistent in several other areas of your life, including the fact
   that you were the editor of your high school yearbook, that you really
   miss that one cool restaurant you used to hang out at in your
   hometown, and that some high school buddy of yours may be coming up
   for a visit in a few weeks if he can get his father to lend him his
   car.

   Your girlfriend cemented her No.1 ranking as the least interesting
   subject on campus, however,  when you became highly emotional about
   her at a party last Saturday after having what eyewitnesses said was
   "only like, maybe two beers."

   "[You] even told this one girl who obviously wasn't hitting on [you]
   that [you were] taken, and then proceeded to talk her ear off about
   how great [your] girlfriend is," said one of your floormates, who
   wished to remain anonymous for fear of being trapped in another dull
   conversation about your girlfriend. "What a [total pussy]."

   Furthermore, dorm insiders claimed that everyone is glad you won't be
   able to make it to the big get-to-know-each-other floor outing at the
   Cheesecake Factory this Thursday night at 8 p.m., as that is your
   scheduled chat time with whatever-her-stupid-name is.

   Your girlfriend could not be reached for comment, as she was busy
   French-kissing some high school dude as of press time.

