
   LOS ANGELES--A chilling national poll of U.S. children ages 3 through
   12 estimated that nearly 75 million youngsters suffer both physical
   and psychological abuse at the hands of their parents on a daily
   basis.
   [4]Enlarge Image Majority Of Children 

   An abused child awaits her single allotted hour of television per day.

   The poll, whose findings are part of a 700-page report released
   Tuesday by a coalition of child abuse monitoring and prevention
   organizations, indicts nearly 95 percent of American parents. It
   documents abuses ranging from less severe offenses, such as children
   being denied snacks just before dinner, to more egregious, long-term
   cases of neglect, such as never ever getting what they want, ever.

   "My parents always tell me that I have to finish all my math homework
   or I won't be allowed to watch TV," said study participant and abuse
   victim "Derek," 10, who told researchers that some of his earliest
   memories were of this kind of mistreatment. "They're so mean. I hate
   them."

   "I hate them, I hate them, I hate them," he added.

   Encouraged to speak freely and confidentially about their home lives,
   subjects shocked even seasoned child welfare advocates with tales of
   systematic deprival and gratuitous cruelty. One Illinois boy told of
   being forced to linger with his mother in fabric stores and later
   leaving a Toys "R" Us empty-handed, even though the store sold a water
   gun he really wanted. An Arkansas 9-year-old said he spent all of
   third grade carrying a boring brown backpack instead of a super-cool
   Spider-Man one like a friend, whose parents love him, had. And a
   6-year-old girl from Wisconsin was forced to sit at a dining room
   table for nearly two hours until she finished her canned green beans,
   a food widely considered by poll respondents to be disgusting and
   suitable only for adults.

   "To hear the sadness in these kids' voices when they talk about how
   they are scared--literally scared--to bring home poor report cards, is
   heartbreaking," said Dr. Deirdre Fulton, child psychologist and
   director of the Nationwide Coalition to End Child Abuse, who
   co-authored the study. "Some of the children we interviewed even
   wished they were dead so their parents would feel guilty at their
   funerals."

   "No child should ever wish to die," Fulton added.

   According to pollsters, most victims were surprisingly open, even
   eager, to discuss their abuse, although some were less forthcoming
   about traumatic experiences that involved inappropriate touching.

   "It's so embarrassing, and everybody sees it," said 7-year-old
   "Harry," whose mother hugs and kisses him goodbye in front of the
   school bus every day. "When it's happening, I close my eyes and wish
   it would stop, but it just goes on forever."

   Other victims recounted similar forms of privacy invasion, such as
   being asked if they were wearing clean underwear, and being stripped
   naked and made to bathe, even after clearly stating that they did not
   need a bath.

   Hair is another focus of unseemly pathological fixations, many
   children allege: Six out of 10 girls interviewed said that their
   mothers routinely and painfully pull, twist, and tug their hair into
   "stupid" hairstyles like pigtails, and some boys said that their
   mothers go so far as to use saliva to paste their hair into place.

   According to the report, a shocking 100 percent of children who
   claimed to have been abused said their parents repeatedly answered
   "maybe" to a request, and then withheld from them a definitive answer
   for hours or, in some cases, days.

   In addition to those who admitted to being touched inappropriately, 93
   percent of children said they have, at one point or another, been
   subject to various types of physical abuse.

   "My parents make me practice the piano for like 20 hours a day," said
   8-year-old "Lacy," adding that sometimes she will hide in her closet
   to avoid rehearsal. "They told me if I hate it so much I can quit when
   I'm in seventh grade. That's like 40 years from now."

   Some children, mostly boys, have even been pressed into brutal
   physical labor by their fathers, who demand their sons help them in
   the yard on Saturdays--one of only two days off for children who spend
   an average of 600 hours a week at school.

   "He treats me like a slave," 12-year-old "Michael" said. "It's like
   it's my fault that my dad decided to buy a house with a lawn. And then
   when I do help, he says I shouldn't have had a bad attitude about it."

   "Mom just sits there and lets the entire thing happen," "Michael"
   added.

   In some of the more disturbing cases of abuse, parents reportedly take
   a domineering interest in their children's social lives, often
   threatening severe but undefined punishment for not being home by
   dark. Some children said their parents attempt to cut them off
   completely from the outside world, making many websites and television
   channels inaccessible and never letting them hang out with their
   friends.

   The National Parents Association declined to comment on the
   overwhelming levels of abuse. When asked why they wouldn't comment,
   the NPA released a tersely worded statement: "Because we said so."

