
   BOSTON--Now that Manny Ramirez has reported to camp and the
   spring-training opener against Minnesota is in the books, Red Sox fans
   are turning their attention to the awesome power rumored to dwell
   within much-touted off-season pitching acquisition Daisuke
   Matsuzaka--a man who many say possesses pitching powers and techniques
   beyond the comprehension of mortal fans.
   [4]Enlarge Image Red Sox Fans 

   Matsuzaka's picture from the 2007 Red Sox Media Guide.

   "Daisuke is the pitching master!" said Boston Globe baseball columnist
   Bob Ryan, hopping from one foot to the other as he described videotape
   footage of Matsuzaka's otherworldly pitching power and control
   banishing a flock of evil, conniving, left-handed-batting carp-spirits
   to the netherworld during a 2003 Seibu Lions game. "His Ultimate
   Galactic Dragon Gyroball Pitch Power Explosion breaks three feet
   inside before cutting sharply toward the dugout, where falsehood and
   cowardice are forced to shrink before it!"

   Since before Boston signed Matsuzaka to a six-year, $52 million
   contract last November, the city's baseball fans were inundated with
   incredible tales of the Japanese ace's pitching prowess, many of which
   seemed too good to be believed. Nevertheless, most Red Sox fans find
   it hard to contain their excitement at the thought of finally seeing
   Matsuzaka's skills on display.

   "Battle on, Daisuke! Wither their spirits with your mystical Four
   Winds Split-Finger Shottu-jitsu! Repel their cruel affronts with your
   Triple-Star Cut-Fastball Technique of the Joyous Uplifting Dynamo,
   clocked at a respectable 96 miles per hour! And baffle their
   comprehension and deceive in turn their deceitful hearts with your
   Two-Seam Shadow-Strike Clouded-Eye Shinobi Sinker!" said 44-year-old
   accountant and spring-training attendee Roger Fettleman, quoting the
   back of Matsuzaka's Red Sox rookie card almost word for word as he
   watched the right-hander warm up in the bullpen before his first
   Grapefruit League start. "Truly, it is within your grasp to go 16-4
   with an ERA under 4.00!"

   Fettleman is hardly alone among Boston fans in having both his spirits
   and his expectations raised to unusual levels by the seven-year
   veteran of Japan's top leagues. Besides the talk surrounding his
   alleged gyroball, rumors have circulated about his uncanny ability to
   read a batter, his cleverness in using his fastballs as his out
   pitches instead of over-relying on breaking balls, and his almost
   inexhaustible wellspring of ki, or spirit-energy.

   "If what we've heard is correct, then Matsuzaka indeed possesses a
   Power Level of well over 9,000," said ESPN's Peter Gammons, struggling
   to contain his excitement on Tuesday's edition of Baseball Tonight.
   "Over 9,000! Which, of course, is only to be expected of the
   ballplayer whom sources say descended into the Underworld to spit in
   the flaming eye of the Lord of Hell and steal the secret power of the
   Onikaze, or 'demon-storm' pitch, which tails away nicely from both
   lefties and righties."

   Despite the constant adulation and high expectations, the 27-year-old
   right-hander has been modest when dealing with the press.

   "Boston fans are the greatest fans in the world," Matsuzaka told
   reporters through an interpreter upon being asked if he had left Japan
   out of fears that his Ultimate Galactic Dragon Gyroball Pitch Power
   Explosion might split Mount Fuji, strike the rising sun from the sky,
   and awaken the wrathful atomic lizard Gojira. "I'm very happy and
   excited to be a member of the Red Sox."

