
   DEARBORN, MI--Still reeling from a $12.6 billion loss last year and a
   steadily declining customer base, the Ford Motor Company announced
   plans Monday to invest its entire third- and fourth-quarter
   manufacturing and advertising budgets into reintroducing the Model T,
   one of history's best known and most innovative car models.
   [4]Enlarge Image Ford Model T 

   A Ford spokesman poses with the once-revolutionary automobile in a
   Michigan showroom.

   "Today's drivers want to get in touch with the experience of sitting
   behind the wheel of a finely crafted, planetary-gear vehicle with
   manual crank shafts," said Ford's president and CEO Alan Mulally, who
   expects the first line of Model Ts to be available for sale by
   mid-December and safe for driving as soon as it is neither snowing nor
   raining. "We're getting back to the basics, bringing the quality and
   elegance of 1908 into the 21st century. We want to show the country
   why, at one point, every single car driven in America was a Ford."

   Although market analysts have for months predicted that the struggling
   company would sell off its less successful subsidiaries and expand
   into hybrid cars in order to remain economically viable, the
   Michigan-based auto producer decided instead to open 12 new factories
   and retrofit another seven at a cost of more than $100 million in
   order to produce parts such as the oil-lamp headlights and wooden
   artillery wheels for the two-speed Model T.

   While Mulally admits that the initial cost of producing the so-called
   "Tin Lizzies" will be an enormous investment, the company will save
   millions of dollars by paying workers on the man-powered assembly
   lines--once considered a revolutionary breakthrough--wages at 1911
   rates. Working in back-to-back 10-hour shifts, employees should be
   capable of producing 20 to 25 units per week, meaning the 32,000 Model
   Ts that Mulally believes will lift the company out of near bankruptcy
   will be on the road within six years.
   [5]Enlarge Image Model T Jump 

   "Frankly, I think we've gotten so concerned with adding frills like
   GPS navigational systems, seat belts, and exhaust pipes that we've
   forgotten what really matters: open-air bench seating," Mulally said.
   "We promise that each Model T that comes off the line will last much,
   much longer than today's cars. Face it, we just don't make them like
   we used to."

   Though the company planned to make the announcement this spring, it
   was delayed after a number of parts could not be secured from their
   original, early-20th-century suppliers--many of which, after two world
   wars and one major economic depression, no longer exist. Throughout
   the process, Mulally personally spent two hours on the phone trying to
   track down rubber from the Belgian Congo, and sent top executives all
   the way to Mandalay to find a company that still produces magneto
   generator parts.

   But despite the Model T's need for coil boxes, crank ratchets, and
   spring shackles that cost nearly five times as much as today's
   standard auto components, Ford executives are hopeful that a
   combination of the automobiles' "interchangeable parts" design and low
   $950 sticker price will propel the company back to the success it
   enjoyed a century ago.  In an effort to convince the American consumer
   that automobiles are "not just for the scion sons of wealthy robber
   barons anymore," Ford will unveil a massive advertising blitz this
   fall, including a series of black-and-white ads, short news strips
   shown between double features at the nation's leading silent-film
   houses, and so-called "barkers" who will shout the Model T's praises
   through megaphones on street corners across the country.

   "Everyone from schoolchildren to quiz-show participants has been
   hearing the name 'Model T' for almost a century now," Ford marketing
   director Patricia Curtis said. "You can't buy that kind of name
   recognition."

   To compete with the Model T, several other major auto manufacturers
   have begun reproducing their own classic car lines, including
   Chrysler's DeSoto, Karl Benz's original Motorwagen, and BMW's World
   War II-era German U-boat.

