
   WASHINGTON, DC--Top physicists from several major American
   universities appeared before a Congressional committee Monday to
   request $50 billion for a science thing that would further U.S.
   advancement science-wise and broaden human knowing.
   [4]Enlarge Image Scientist Ask 

   "The [science thing] will make valuable inroads into our ultimate
   understanding of how [atoms and quarks move around and so on]."

   David Kaminski,
   Caltech Physicist

   The scientists spoke for approximately three hours about the
   complicated science machine, which is expensive, and large, telling
   members of the House Committee on Science and Technology that the
   tubular, gamma-ray-using mechanism is vital in some big way. Yet the
   high price tag of the thing, which would be built on a 40-square-mile
   plot of land where the science would ultimately occur, remained a
   pressing question.

   "While expense is something to consider, I think it's very important
   that we have this kind of scientific apparatus, because, in the end, I
   have always said that science is more important than it is
   unimportant," Committee chairman Rep. Bart Gordon (D-TN) said. "And
   it's essential we stay ahead of China, Japan, and Germany in science.
   We are ahead in space, with the NASA rockets going to other planets,
   so we should be ahead in science too."

   According to the scientists, the electromagnetic science-maker will
   make atoms move and spin around very quickly, though spectators at the
   hearing said afterward they could not account for how one could get
   some atoms to move around faster than other ones if everything is made
   of atoms anyway. In addition, the scientists said that the device
   would be several miles in circumference, which puzzled onlookers who
   had long assumed that atoms were tiny. Despite these apparent
   inconsistencies, the scientists, in Rep. Gordon's words, appeared
   "very smart-sounding" and confident that their big spinner would solve
   some kind of problem they described.
   [5]Enlarge Image Scientist Ask Jump 

   The highlight of the scientists' testimony was a series of several
   colorful diagrams of how the big machine would work. One consisted of
   colored dots resembling Skittles banging into one another. Noting the
   motion lines behind the circle-ball things, committee members surmised
   that they were slamming together in a "fast, forceful manner." Yet
   some expressed doubts as to whether they justified the $50 billion
   price tag.

   "These scientists could trim $10 million if they would just cut out
   some of the purple and blue spheres," said Rep. Roscoe Bartlett
   (R-MD), explaining that he understood the need for an abundance of
   reds and greens. "With all of those molecules and atoms going in every
   direction, the whole thing looks a bit unorganized, especially for
   science."

   Another diagram presented to lawmakers contained several important
   squiggly lines, numbers, and letters. Despite not being numbers, the
   letters were reportedly meant to represent mathematics too. The
   scientists seemed to believe that correct math was what would help
   make the science thing go.

   The scientists concluded their presentation by informing the committee
   that, if constructed correctly, the super science-flyer would be able
   to answer questions about many, many things, mainly stuff about the
   universe that sounded like it would be very good to know about.

   "Now, I'm no science major, but if I'm being told by a group of people
   that the protons, neutrons, and electrons need unifying, then I think
   we owe it to the American people to go in and unify them," Rep. Mark
   Udall (D-CO) said. "After all, isn't a message of unity what we want
   to send to our children?"

   Still, some committee members were not as convinced, saying that the
   building of a micro-macro isotope-making science generator should not
   be a top priority.

   "Fifty billion dollars to buy atoms is too much," Rep. Tom Feeney
   (R-FL) said. "Frankly, I don't understand why they don't just gather
   up all the leftover atoms in their test tubes and Bunsen burners. I
   think the scientists should have to use those up before getting new
   ones."

   The scientists remained hopeful that their federal funding will be
   approved.

   "The congressmen appeared receptive to what we were saying, and I
   think that we made a very convincing case as to why we need a [science
   gadget] of this magnitude on American soil," said Caltech physicist
   David Kaminski, who added various other scientific information. "[Some
   complicated physics-related act] would be possible in our lifetime
   only through the creation of a [science thing]."

