   Brady Quinn

   CLEVELAND--Establishing a reputation for quarterback performance that
   football insiders have called "reasonable," Browns quarterback Brady
   Quinn silenced his critics and stunned his coaches, teammates, and
   family by performing competently enough in his limited play during
   preseason games to put the Cleveland Browns in 2007 post-preseason
   contention.

   "I guess I can only say 'Wow,'" former Miami Dolphins quarterback and
   current Inside The NFL co-host Dan Marino said Tuesday following the
   announcement that Cleveland would advance to the regular season,
   playing the Pittsburgh Steelers in their first game on Sept. 9. "Wow.
   I think I speak for everyone when I say no one thought Brady Quinn
   could do it. To see him come into that preseason game against the
   Lions and just embarrass one of the best auto mechanics to ever play
   cornerback in the NFL...I admit it, I didn't think he had it in him."

   "Quinn seemed possessed, like he was out there playing like it was the
   last game those other guys would ever play," added Marino, saying
   Quinn reminded him of a younger version of a quarterback who used to
   back him up.

   In his first-ever preseason start against the Detroit Lions, Quinn
   defied the extremely low expectations when he did not run out onto the
   field with his helmet on backwards, trip over the yard lines, line up
   to take the snap behind a wideout, or attempt to roll the ball down
   the field towards his receivers.

   "I couldn't believe what I was seeing," said Sports Illustrated
   football writer Peter King. "The conventional wisdom going into that
   game was that Brady Quinn was a huge mistake on the part of the
   Browns. But anyone who saw him will tell you he might not be all that
   big of a mistake after all."

   This breathtaking display of basic knowledge of football fundamentals
   continued in a workmanlike display of quarterbacking against a group
   of men attempting to make the Lions, as Quinn threw for 81 yards while
   not falling into any random holes or stepping on any rakes that had
   been left lying around the field. And in the final game of the
   preseason, facing a Bears defense that almost certainly contained
   players who will make Chicago's taxi squad, Quinn threw only a single
   interception while conspicuously not lighting himself or his teammates
   on fire or tying his shoelaces together even once.

   Predictably, Browns fans were ecstatic at the level of Quinn's
   performance.

   "Mark my words, Brady is going to be one of our quarterbacks of the
   immediate future," said Ken Fairfield, a Browns preseason-ticket
   holder who said he would be camping out for regular-season Browns
   tickets long before they went on sale, if not for the fact they would
   almost certainly be readily available. "I can't believe people said he
   wouldn't even be an adequate field general. If what I saw in the
   second halves of those games wasn't adequate, I don't know what is."

   "I'm completely surprised...I always felt that we could count on Quinn
   to totally blow it, but this is whole different side that we could
   never imagine," Browns head coach Romeo Crennel said. "I anticipated
   that he would hand off the ball to the first defensive lineman he saw.
   I even game-planned for it, keeping a fullback deep in the backfield
   to tackle him if he started running the wrong way.  But then he goes
   and throws a basic little dump-off pass to Cribbs in the flat and it
   turns into a touchdown."

   "I'm not saying we wouldn't have made it to the regular season without
   him," said Crennel, "but his play certainly didn't hurt. Which is one
   hell of a nice surprise, let me tell you."

   Charlie Frye has been confirmed as the starter for the Sept. 9 game.
   Quinn is currently fourth on the depth chart, behind Frye, Derek
   Anderson, and strong-armed long-snapper Ryan Pontbriand.

