
   WASHINGTON, DC--Seeking to "narrow the focus of the drug war to the
   true enemy," Congress passed a bill legalizing drug use for the
   gainfully employed Monday.
     Drug War Icon

   "Stockbrokers, lawyers, English professors... you're not the problem
   here," said DEA Administrator Asa Hutchinson at a White House press
   conference. "If you are paying taxes and keeping your yard tidy, we're
   not going to hassle you if you come home from a hard day of work and
   want to enjoy a little pot or blow. But if, on the other hand, you're
   one of these lazy, shiftless types hanging out on the street all day
   looking for your next high, we're coming after you."

   The new law, which goes into effect May 1, will enable police
   departments and courts to focus on what Hutchinson called "the real
   drug offenders."

   "There's no point going after some cardiac surgeon who needs some
   speed to keep him sharp," Hutchinson said. "That's not what the law
   was intended to prevent. But the more destructive drug users--the
   addict who spends his welfare money on crack, the guy in Harlem who
   smokes marijuana--that is something that we as a society must not
   tolerate."
   [4]Enlarge Image Drugs Now Legal If User Is Employed 

   According to Drug Czar John P. Walters, the legislation should have a
   beneficial effect on the health of the American people.

   "As a result of this new law, we expect use of addictive, harmful
   drugs like heroin and crack--those statistically more likely to be
   linked to unemployment--to drop," Walters said. "Meanwhile, decent
   people with good jobs can continue their responsible use of milder
   drugs like E and cocaine in peace."

   Walters said the new legislation will make it significantly easier to
   fight the drug war. The nation's courts will not be clogged with cases
   involving club kids caught with "Vitamin K" or doctors prescribing
   Vicodin to rich housewives. More money can be freed up to build
   prisons to keep chronically unemployed addicts in jail and off the
   streets--the only statistically proven method of improving an addict's
   chance of recovery.

   "Clearly, a lot of people doing drugs simply cannot handle them,"
   Walters said. "We've got to get the drugs out of the hands of these
   people, and give them back to the weekend user."

   The law, Hutchinson noted, will also help protect the nation's poor
   and unemployed, who are not as equipped to handle the effects of drug
   addiction as their more affluent counterparts.

   "Drugs are addictive, and that's true whether you're a ghetto gang
   member or a Harvard-educated entertainment lawyer," Hutchinson said.
   "But the cold, hard truth is, if the ghetto kid gets hooked, he isn't
   going to clean up in a rehab clinic in Palm Springs and maybe even
   become president, now, is he? That's why we need to protect the less
   fortunate among us with the threat of arrest and incarceration."

   The U.S. economy also stands to benefit. Initial surveys indicate that
   the threat of jail will motivate recreational drug users to seek
   employment, reducing the nation's welfare rolls.

   "Legal weed versus jail?" asked Cory Everly, 23, an unemployed Austin,
   TX, singer-songwriter. "I am so totally going down to the sub shop
   today to ask Rudy for my job back."

   Added Everly: "Rudy's my boss... at the sub shop."

   "The new American motto is 'Work Hard, Play Hard,'" Hutchinson said.
   "Do a few bumps of coke at your gay friend's party. Go to your be-in
   or your Lollapalooza rave or whatever it's called this year. But you'd
   better make it in to work on Monday, buddy, or you're going to jail."

   "Sorry if some of my comments have been a bit rambling and unfocused,"
   Hutchinson added. "I'm a little high right now."

