
   CHARLOTTE, NC--Only days after its long-anticipated, much-criticized
   Car of Tomorrow debuted to overwhelmingly negative reviews at the
   Bristol Motor Speedway, NASCAR responded to the wishes of competitors
   and fans alike by introducing the stylishly retro, technologically
   retrograde NEXTEL Cup Car of Yesterday.
   [4]Enlarge Image NASCAR Introduces 

   "This is exactly what everyone from race teams to race fans wanted all
   along--a real American racecar," said Robby Gordon, standing in front
   of the Jim Beam '77 Oldsmobile Cutlass Supreme he will drive for the
   rest of the season. "To hell with things like spoilers, adjustable
   suspensions, disc brakes, shoulder belts, all that junk. People want
   to see us racing the cars they drive every day, and anyone who's seen
   the parking lot at a NASCAR race will tell you that's what the Car of
   Yesterday gives them."

   Based on tried-and-true NASCAR designs from what many consider the
   golden age of stock-car racing, the Car Of Yesterday is based on the
   racing team's choice of four-door body styles: either the '77 Cutlass
   Supreme, the '79 Chevrolet Caprice Classic, the '78 Dodge Diplomat,
   the '77 Ford Granada, the '77 Mercury Gran Marquis, or for series
   newcomers Toyota, the 1989 Corolla. All cars, regardless of body
   style, must have fully reclining seats, column shifters, vinyl tops,
   ashtrays, and automatically retracting seatbelts. Adding spoilers and
   air dams for purposes other than providing advertising space is
   forbidden, although teams will be allowed to bolt wooden 2-by-8 planks
   to their front and rear bumpers for the contact-heavy short-track
   races. Mechanically, all cars will be basically identical, featuring
   360-cubic-inch V-8 engines with the air filters reversed, "glass-pack"
   mufflers, and factory power steering.

   "Our primary concern with the Car of Yesterday was safety," said
   NASCAR competition director Robin Pemberton. "The fans hate that shit.
   We had to keep that in mind when we went back to the drawing board, so
   we took away anything that increased grip, improved handling, or
   prevented a stock car from experiencing a sudden and total loss of
   control. NASCAR isn't about the cars, it's about the drivers. And the
   Car of Yesterday keeps the driver involved with the vehicle, whether
   he's just driving it or, ideally, crashing it."

   The Car of Yesterday underwent intensive single-car and multi-car
   tests earlier this week at Daytona, Texas Motor Speedway, and
   Martinsville, with testing director Brett Bodine and his crew wrecking
   34 cars in routine driving. An enthusiastic Bodine reported the new
   design passed with flying colors.

   "I could barely keep the thing out of the wall. It swapped ends, got
   way loose, and nearly spun out with little to no warning. Sometimes it
   dove down towards the infield for no reason I ever did figure out, and
   once coming off the banking at Daytona it rebounded off the suspension
   stops hard enough to bounce the whole front end in the air," said
   Bodine, who was pronounced healthy and released from Daytona Beach
   Memorial Hospital early Wednesday afternoon. "It may be the best
   all-around NASCAR stocker I've ever driven. I wish they had these cars
   when I was still racing, but unfortunately, they'd advanced past that
   point by then."

   Drivers were unanimously positive when informed of the Car of
   Yesterday and praised NASCAR's courage in pursuing a deign philosophy
   that satisfied fans and racers alike.

   "Like I said before, that Car of Tomorrow was crap," said Kyle Busch,
   who won the March 25 race in which the controversial design debuted.
   "It kind of stuck to the track in a boring way, and just sort of went
   where you pointed it. But this car reminds me of the ones I grew up
   watching--not just on the track, but on the two-lane highway outside
   of town. Hell, for all I know, this one was there."

   NASCAR president Mike Helton is currently working closely with all
   competing teams, current Nextel Cup drivers, and a network of salvage
   yards and used-car dealers to make sure every team has enough cars and
   spares for the Car of Yesterday's debut race, currently scheduled for
   April 29 at Talladega Superspeedway, the largest tri-oval on the
   Nextel Cup circuit and one of NASCAR's fastest and most challenging
   tracks.

   "We want to make sure fans have a strong first impression of the Car
   of Yesterday," said Helton. "And believe me, seeing a few dozen of
   these all-American road-hugging beauties roaring flat-out into
   Talladega's Turn One is something they'll be talking about for years."

