
   TERRE HAUTE, IN--Indianapolis Colts quarterback Peyton Manning
   interrupted an intrasquad scrimmage Tuesday for approximately 45
   minutes in order to show backup quarterback Jim Sorgi how to properly
   hold his clipboard.
   [4]Enlarge Image Peyton Manning 

   Manning demonstrates the proper form to use while holding the
   clipboard with one hand and using the headset during third-quarter
   second-and-long situations.

   "He's got to learn consistency if he's going to be the backup on this
   team, and that starts with the little things, like holding the
   clipboard with two hands," Manning told reporters following the
   practice. "When I see my backup holding the clipboard with the top
   portion clenched in his one hand and the bottom portion digging into
   his bicep, I see a quarterback taking a 'me-first' approach. That's
   unacceptable."

   "Holding the clipboard isn't about individual performance. It's about
   winning," added Manning, who later stated he was disappointed in Sorgi
   and that he thought the two were on the same page following a two-hour
   clipboard conversation he had with Sorgi during the Colts' voluntary
   spring practice. "I once thought that if Jim wanted to set himself
   apart, maybe he could wear his hat with a little extra curvature in
   the brim. But for now, I'd have to say he doesn't deserve that
   privilege."

   Manning claimed to have mentioned several previous
   clipboard-mishandling incidents to Sorgi prior to the on-field
   confrontation, including times when Sorgi held only the bottom-left
   corner of the clipboard "as if he didn't care if he dropped it"; when
   he caught Sorgi gripping the clipboard with two hands, but loosely and
   "as if he was just going through the motions"; and when he saw Sorgi
   standing on the sidelines trying to spin the clipboard on his index
   finger, an action Manning called disrespectful to both the team and
   the game of football.

   "I even caught him out of the corner of my eye letting the clipboard
   hang carelessly down by his thigh during our preseason game against
   the [Chicago] Bears," said Manning, adding that he had not said
   anything to Sorgi at the time because he wanted to give him a chance
   to rectify the problem on his own. "I almost burned a time-out, but
   that was on the same day he took my advice to affix an 18-inch length
   of clean white cord to the clipboard in order to keep better track of
   his writing utensil, so I let it slide. Baby steps, after all."

   Manning said he began to suspect that Sorgi had reverted to a careless
   and lackadaisical state of mind upon seeing Sorgi gripping the
   clipboard at the top part of its clamping mechanism, which Manning
   said could have ultimately led to the application of enough pressure
   to allow the documents held by the clipboard to escape, and possibly
   even be blown towards the opposing sideline.

   "Look--if he messes up like that and the other team has all of our
   offensive schemes, then we don't repeat as [Super Bowl] champions,"
   Manning said. "It's that simple. True, I've never had to hold that
   clipboard, and I never plan to. Jim Sorgi is going to be holding that
   clipboard for the rest of my career, so it's essential he becomes a
   pro at it."

   "We're only as strong as our weakest link," Manning added. "Jim Sorgi
   had best remember that."

   Though Sorgi admitted to violating Manning's clipboard-holding policy,
   he said a lack of communication, not a lack of commitment, was really
   to blame.

   "Sometimes Peyton and I just aren't always on the same wavelength,"
   Sorgi told reporters after Manning left the facility. "It gets really
   confusing. Basically, Peyton likes to give me three different
   clipboard-holding options during specific game situations, signaling
   them to me before the snap. At any given time during a game, he could
   scream at me to change my grip to, say, ten-and-two instead of
   six-and-four, and naturally, there will be times I don't hear him
   completely."

   "I just wish he would stick to his initial clipboard-holding plan--two
   hands at three and nine," Sorgi said. "It would make things easier on
   all of us."

   Upon being told of Sorgi's comments, Manning commented that Sorgi's
   "prima donna attitude is the reason he's not allowed to run
   kneel-downs during the regular season."

   Colts head coach Tony Dungy claimed he was unaware of any problem with
   his quarterbacks and said he would be taking more of a hands-off
   approach this season, allowing Manning to do the majority, if not all,
   of the coaching.

