
   ALBANY, NY--In one of the most merciful disasters in recent years, a
   Greyhound bus traveling from Rochester to Albany, NY skidded into a
   ditch Tuesday, killing a dozen deadbeat fathers and penniless addicts,
   and putting nearly 20 more hapless bastards out of their misery.
   [4]Enlarge Image 

   Four of the degenerate sacks of shit who perished in the accident.

   According to Greyhound officials, the fatal crash occurred less than
   an hour after passengers gathered their pathetic belongings and
   dragged what little hope they had left onto the despair-soaked bus.
   Emergency crews called to the scene described the remains of the
   victims as "slightly more lifeless than they were before the
   accident."

   "This is by far the saddest thing I've ever witnessed," said head
   rescue worker Charles Rabnett, referring to the sea of fast-food
   wrappers, losing lottery tickets, and scorched corpses that littered
   the crash site. "We've done our best to contact family members and
   loved ones, but so far we've only been able to reach four parole
   officers and 10 AA sponsors."

   Added Rabnett: "Dear God, what a terrible waste of my time."

   While officials are still not sure what happened aboard the
   Albany-bound bus, a number of theories have been posited, including
   icy roads, low visibility due to fog, and the likelihood that the
   driver, Ron Jenkins, fell asleep at the wheel after spending a
   restless night consumed by his failures as a husband.

   Police investigators also suspect that the cause of the accident may
   have been as simple as "these luckless bastards getting shit on by the
   world one last time."
   [5]Enlarge Image 

   Rescue workers were visibly sickened by the number of hamburger
   wrappers and soda bottles strewn about the bus.

   "Dental records have helped identify only two-thirds of the
   casualties, as the remaining 10 passengers were discovered to have
   none of their original teeth left," Albany police chief Henry Goodwin
   said. "Among those, one is believed to have been a recently disowned
   teenage mother, the other an elderly widow forced to pawn her favorite
   necklace in order to purchase a bus ticket, and what appears to be the
   hollow shells of several middle-aged men."

   No survivors were reported following the accident. In addition,
   initial surveillance of the wreckage seems to indicate that those who
   managed to pull their world-weary bodies out of the overturned bus,
   gave up on their wretched existence within minutes. According to
   paramedics, it is likely that many of the casualties had suffered
   during the crash, and, if not then, for years earlier.

   "Thank heavens nobody made it," said chief paramedic John Thurston,
   who described the "disturbing smell" at the scene as a combination of
   gasoline, body odor, Aqua Velva, and relentless disappointment. "For a
   second there, I was worried I'd actually have to interact with some of
   these people."

   In response to the relative tragedy, Greyhound has agreed to donate
   $200 worth of rolled quarters and greasy, crumpled dollar bills they
   had collected as bus fare to a local charity. The casualties of the
   crash will also be memorialized with a small commemorative plaque that
   will hang at the Albany station, between an out-of-order vending
   machine and a set of bathrooms where customers can often be heard
   weeping.

   "It's hard to believe that something like this could even happen,"
   said Albany resident Carl Robinson, who, since losing his home to a
   fire earlier this month, has been sleeping in the city's dilapidated
   bus station. "To know that life, no matter how dreadful or hopeless,
   always has a chance of coming to an end--it's so inspiring."

   As of press time, hundreds of men and women had gathered at the site
   of the fatal accident to mourn the loss of a perfectly good bus.

