
   NEW YORK--Saying he could no longer stand idly by while a vital part
   of American culture is lost forever, activist and Broadway producer
   Mel Brooks has founded a private nonprofit organization dedicated to
   preserving the word "schmuck."
   [4]Enlarge Image Mel Brooks 

   An emotional Brooks stopped short of kvetching at a schmuck fundraiser
   Monday.

   "Schmuck is dying," a sober Brooks said during a 2,000-person rally
   held in his hometown of Williamsburg, Brooklyn Monday. "For many of
   us, saying 'schmuck' is a way of life. Yet when I walk down the street
   and see people behaving in foolish, pathetic, or otherwise schmucky
   ways, I hear only the words 'prick' and 'douche bag.' I just shake my
   head and think, 'I don't want to live in a world like this.'"

   The nonprofit, Schmucks For Schmuck, has compiled schmuck-related data
   from the past 80 years and conducted its own independent research on
   contemporary "schmuck" usage. According to Brooks, the statistics are
   frightening: Utterances of the word "schmuck" have declined every year
   since its peak in 1951, and in 2006, the word was spoken a mere 28
   times--17 of these times by Brooks himself. The study indicates that
   today, when faced with a situation in which one can use a targeted or
   self-deprecating insult to convey a general feeling of disgust, people
   are 50 times more likely to use the word "jerk" than "schmuck," 100
   times more likely to use "dick," and 15,000 times more likely to use
   "fucking asshole."

   Perhaps more startling, only 23 percent of men know what schmuck
   means, and only 1.2 percent of these men are under the age of 78. If
   such trends continue, Brooks estimates that by 2011, such lesser-used
   terms as "imbecile," "dummy," "schlub," and "contemptible
   ne'er-do-well" will all surpass schmuck, which is projected to
   completely disappear by the year 2020 or whenever Brooks dies.

   "We must save this word!" Brooks said to thunderous applause as those
   in attendance began chanting "Schmuck! Schmuck! Schmuck!" "How will we
   be able to charmingly describe someone who acts in an inappropriate
   manner? Especially given the tragic loss of the word 'schmegeggie' in
   2001. So I urge you: Tonight, when you get home, please, call up your
   family, your friends, your loved ones, and tell them they're a bunch
   of schmucks."
   [5]Enlarge Image Activists 

   Hundreds turned out at a Boca Raton, FL demonstration to show their
   support for the dying word.

   "I've never told anyone this before," Brooks added, choking back
   tears, "but my father was a schmuck."

   The foundation has already raised more than $20 million, thanks to
   donations from supporters such as Jackie Mason, Albert Brooks, the
   Schtupp Institute, Sen. Russ Feingold (D-WI), and the Henny Youngman
   Endowment for the Preservation of Schmekel. The money will go toward
   projects aimed at reintegrating "schmuck" into the English lexicon,
   including billboards and flyers plastered with the word "schmuck," the
   upcoming 5K Schlep for Schmuck Awareness, and a new Mel Brooks film.

   "The world cannot afford to lose this valuable and versatile word,"
   Brooks told reporters during a charity auction in Manhattan's Upper
   West Side Tuesday, where attendees bid for the chance to have a
   private lunch with Brooks and repeatedly call him a schmuck. "You can
   be a poor schmuck, a lazy schmuck, a dumb schmuck, or just a plain old
   schmuck. A group of people can be collectively referred to as
   schmucks. You can call someone a schmuck, and you can be called a
   schmuck. You can even call yourself a schmuck."

   "Plus, it's just so fun to say," Brooks added. "Schmuck."

   Many of the foundation's volunteers say they share Brooks' passion for
   the word "schmuck," as well as his outrage that it is slowly
   disappearing from everyday use. They claim that if they do not act
   now, the trend could create a snowball effect.

   "Today it's schmuck, tomorrow it might be toochis," said SFS volunteer
   Harry Steinbergmann, 82. "What's next, schlemiel? Putz? Schlimazel?"

   Steinbergmann went on to classify this scenario as farcockteh.

   Brooks will be appearing at Brooklyn's Francis Scott Key Junior High
   on Nov. 12 to give an informal lecture about his experiences using the
   word "schmuck," and build grassroots support among a key group of
   young Americans by explaining that "schmuck" is a Yiddish term for the
   foreskin on the head of a penis. In addition, he has hinted at the
   possibility of a reunion with longtime comedy partner Gene Wilder,
   during which the two will call each other schmucks.

