
   WASHINGTON--Longtime political adviser and Republican strategist Karl
   Rove announced Aug. 13 that he would step down from his role as White
   House deputy chief of staff to spend more time in the shadows and
   devote his energy to the things he really cares about, such as
   creeping, slithering, and disappearing for all time into an
   ever-darkening realm shut off from hope and goodness.
   [4]Enlarge Image Rove Resigns 

   Rove shares a final moment with the flicker of light.

   "I've been away from the shadows too long, and it's put a strain on my
   relationship with those black forces I hold dear," an emotional but
   upbeat Rove said. "There are many personal projects I'd like to pursue
   all alone in an opaque void, where God Himself dares not peer, so this
   just seemed like the perfect opportunity to slink off into murky
   blackness."

   Rove, who planned to return at the stroke of midnight Aug. 31 to the
   mysterious underworld from which he emerged two decades ago to do the
   bidding of masters unknown, claimed he never felt comfortable
   operating within the visible light spectrum. The often-controversial
   figure said he was looking forward to "getting away from it all" and
   prowling like a wolf on the wind in that ashen realm where deeds
   unthinkable know no name or order.

   "I am excited to give this new chapter of my life the shadowy
   obfuscation it deserves," Rove said. "There are some matters that
   should just be kept private, far from the prying gaze of mortal eyes
   and wicked Sun."

   While some Washington insiders were surprised by Rove's announcement,
   others close to him said they were happy he finally decided to fully
   enter the shroud of night.

   "The one called Karl Rove hath lingered too much in daylight," said
   one source on the condition of anonymity. "The one called Karl Rove
   feels an undeniable pull toward the sly and inky veil of twilight and
   longs for the warm embrace of its formless depths."

   Upon hearing of Rove's decision to retreat into Styxian obscurity, a
   number of White House aides and various officials throughout  the
   nation's capital hurriedly gathered their personal belongings and
   proceeded to the nearest exit.

