   Confiscated Patriots

   NEW YORK--The hundreds of hours of game and practice scouting
   videotapes that league officials seized from the New England Patriots
   also include over 100 hours of painstakingly thorough footage of
   Patriots quarterback Tom Brady in the shower, sources within the NFL
   competition committee confirmed Tuesday.

   "We are still investigating whether the assembled shower footage of
   Brady soaped up and wreathed in steam--which I can personally confirm
   was in fact taken in the showers of several different NFL-affiliated
   facilities around the league, and appears to have been shot by head
   coach Belichick himself--constitutes a violation of league laws or
   policies," league spokesman Greg Aiello told reporters during a press
   conference held at the league's Manhattan offices. "It is the opinion
   of the commissioner and the league that further extensive study is
   required before any judgment can be rendered in this matter."

   "Our investigation continues to focus on any instances of cheating by
   the New England Patriots, and will continue to focus on cheating no
   matter how much Brady showering footage we find," Aiello added.

   Aiello then displayed a 25-minute composite videotape consisting of
   representative segments and "highlights" of Brady in the shower.

   Analysts agree that the bulk of the shower footage, while certainly
   unusual in many aspects, seems to have been shot with Brady's full
   knowledge and cooperation, although Brady does not appear especially
   enthusiastic. Early footage is also said to include showering
   quarterback Drew Bledsoe, then the Patriots starting quarterback, and
   at least 25 minutes of the earliest-known material was evidently shot
   in the showers at the University of Michigan as Brady was being
   scouted for the draft.

   "Belichick has always been a big believer in spending as much time as
   possible on film study," said Boston Globe football writer Bill Ryan,
   who as a regular Patriots reporter was given the opportunity to view
   outtakes from several of the Brady shower tapes, notably those labeled
   "Super Bowl XXXVI," "Camp 2002/Skeleton Drills," and "Tuck Rule"
   before being thoroughly questioned by league officials. "But I didn't
   know he'd shot so much of it himself. His intensity about it can be
   kind of frightening."

   "To hear Belichick narrating the whole thing, pointing out his
   quarterback's tendencies, identifying Brady's strong points and the
   areas where he needs work, hearing his voice as a counterpoint to the
   sound of the hot running water and seeing that familiar
   sweatshirt-clad arm cut through the mist to hand Brady his towels--you
   realize the man has a unique football mind," said Sports Illustrated
   football correspondent Paul Zimmerman. "If nothing else, the attention
   to every significant detail definitely makes an impression on the
   viewer."

   Although officials have not divulged whether other Patriots players or
   even quarterbacks from other teams were featured in their own
   showering videotapes, Aiello confirmed that the investigation was by
   no means complete and the total inventory may take weeks to assemble.

   "We confiscated thousands of these tapes from the Patriots coaching
   staff," Aiello told reporters, "and hundreds more tapes showing
   nothing but opposing teams sending in offensive and defensive signals.
   It may be some time before we have a complete catalog of what's on
   them. I can confirm, however, that we will be questioning Mr. Brady at
   length about his experiences regarding showering and video cameras,
   and communicating daily with Coach Belichick and team owner Robert
   Kraft concerning any and all videotaped footage of NFL players,
   specifically Tom Brady, in the shower. You have my word on that."

   Neither Belichick nor Brady would comment on the investigation. The
   New England Patriots organization did not respond to requests for
   information, but released a statement Wednesday morning confirming
   that the league had compensated the team and coach for $750,000 in
   exchange for the videotapes in question.

