
   WASHINGTON, DC--Democrats in both houses of Congress demanded a
   thorough inquiry Monday into whether or not the American people think
   they are doing a good enough job, and what, if anything, they should
   do differently.
   [4]Enlarge Image House Democrats 

   Sen. Majority Leader Reid grills the press on whether they like him.

   "We cannot afford to make a wrong move as we face this crucial
   crossroads in our nation's history, which is why we need to know for
   sure what decision you'll support the most before we make it," said
   House Speaker Nancy Pelosi at a Democratic National Committee
   fundraiser Monday, scrutinizing the assembled crowd for signs of
   approval. "The question facing us today is simple: Do you like us? If
   not, why? We demand an answer."

   Added Pelosi: "The time for second-guessing our every move is now."

   The DNC is in the process of forming a blue-ribbon advisory panel to
   investigate the true extent of Democratic popularity. Members
   reportedly include former Democratic congressman and
   independent-committee stalwart Lee Hamilton, pundit Arianna
   Huffington, Columbus, OH resident and semi-regular voter Nicole Jones,
   and Mukesh Chennapragada, a guy in the phone book. Among the panel's
   tasks are determining exactly what the clear mandate the Democrats
   received in their sweeping election victory last November was, and
   seeking the advice of political strategists, trend-watchers,
   historians, elder statesmen, psychologists, family, friends,
   acquaintances, and people on the street believed to represent "real
   Americans."

   Finally, the panel will close its investigation by releasing an
   official "Democratic Performance Comment Card," which will rate the
   party as either "poor," "fair," "average," or "excellent." Room for
   additional comments will be provided on the back of the card.

   Some Democrats, however, deem the panel inadequate, and call for
   Congress to appoint an independent counsel to cross-examine
   constituents. Others believe that the feedback from a special 1-800
   "How's Our Governing?" number, which has been featured on bumper
   stickers affixed to the campaign tour buses of Democratic presidential
   candidates, should be analyzed before proceeding further.

   "We need to aggressively pursue whatever it is people think we should
   do," Sen. John Kerry (D-MA) said. "We took a bold stance against the
   war--is that okay with everyone? We thought that was what people
   wanted, but we are not above changing our minds if that is what the
   situation requires. We also aired some pretty harsh rhetoric about the
   current administration--were we out of line? If people think we should
   ease back on the president for a while, we'll be more than happy to
   take a week off and focus on naming airports. We just need to know."

   Kerry continued: "We do not--and I cannot stress this enough--want to
   offend anybody or cause anyone to dislike us for any reason."

   Senate Majority Leader Harry Reid said he is confident, or mostly
   confident, that the results of the inquiry will make the Democratic
   Party more responsive to the needs of its constituents, or at least
   more likeable.

   "We just want to be as popular as we can be," Reid said. "Without
   immediate and diligent oversight on this matter, we have no idea if we
   are or are not doing whatever it is everybody may or may not want at
   any given time. Most of you are still opposed to the war, right? If an
   election were held today, would you still vote for us? These are
   questions that demand answers."

   "That is, unless that's too much to ask," Reid added. "If that's too
   controversial a question, or if it makes anyone feel uncomfortable in
   any way, please, just let us know. Unless, of course, you honestly
   don't mind. Then it's fine."

   Congressional Republicans have accused Democrats of abusing their
   newfound power.

   "They're bogging down the democratic process for no reason," House
   Minority Leader John Boehner said. "When we were the majority, we
   didn't care how Americans felt--we just did what we wanted."

   The harshest criticism of the move has, as usual, come from the
   Democrats themselves.

   "By acting hastily, we may be encouraging possible negative public
   opinion in 2008," Rep. Bob Filner (D-CA) said. "The last thing we
   Democrats need to do now is pressure the American people, when so much
   is on the line. If they want to give us more feedback, I'm sure they
   will, in time. It's best not to take too many risks."

   "Right?" Filner added.

