
   NEW BRUNSWICK, NJ--A team of three out-of-work stem cell biologists
   announced Monday that, after four weeks of rigorous observation and
   field testing, the evidence conclusively shows that chief researcher
   Dr. Henry Rogers' dog Franklin likes beer.
   [4]Enlarge Image Unemployed Scientists Prove Dog Likes Beer 

   Rogers and McCarthy measured the preferences of test subject Franklin.

   "We're extremely pleased with the results of the experiment," Rogers
   said. "It exceeded our highest expectations, and we're confident that
   our findings will have far-reaching implications for the coming
   weekend."

   According to the team's report, Rogers, along with colleagues Dr. Tom
   McCarthy and Dr. Simon Huang, formulated a hypothesis that Franklin, a
   purebred boxer, would drink beer poured into his water dish.

   After scouring through couch cushions to secure funding for an initial
   test, the first round of experiments began in late February. Franklin
   was administered a sampling of six economy-priced beer brands in
   12-ounce increments at the rate of one unit every 1.5 hours over
   several successive Saturdays. His tail-wagging, equilibrium, speed of
   consumption, and general playfulness were monitored throughout for
   variations from baseline norms.

   While the scientists said the neutered 5-year-old subject showed no
   clear preference for any one brand, Franklin tended to lap up
   Presidente beer at the fastest rate, followed by Rolling Rock, Pabst
   Blue Ribbon, Milwaukee's Best, and lastly, Icehouse.
   [5]Enlarge Image Unemployed Scientists Jump 

   Franklin proved receptive to a variety of liquid-intake methods.

   "Due to our limited resources, we were only able to obtain cases of
   the most inexpensive test materials," Huang said.

   The team recently managed to secure a New Jersey state research
   subsidy of $2.55 by returning the empties.

   McCarthy provided his Shar-Pei, Wrinkles, to serve as a control.
   Wrinkles was only given water to drink, though the team had to scrap
   one set of data due to confounding variables introduced when the
   control subject consumed 7.35 ounces of beer when the scientists'
   backs were turned.

   Despite this setback, Rogers said that the team's data revealed a
   consistent correlation between increased quantity of beer intake and
   erratic behavior, though the intensity seemed to decrease with each
   subsequent day of testing.

   By the end of the study, the 65-pound canine had built up a tolerance
   to alcohol that reportedly rivaled that of his human overseers. The
   test subject did, however, have a tendency to vomit if he chased a
   tennis ball or took a car ride too soon after a study trial.

   Franklin's interest in beer did not appear to be entirely taste-based.
   Over time, the subject's interest in non-alcoholic O'Douls declined as
   he learned to associate the brand's slightly flavorless taste with a
   lack of physiological effects.

   A peer review conducted by recently laid-off Rutgers University
   chemist Dr. Harold Wilson, a respected associate of the three
   scientists, supports their findings.

   "After carefully scrutinizing the data and witnessing a replication of
   the experiment at Dr. Rogers' house, I am confident that these
   findings are solid," Wilson said. "That dog loves beer."

   Rogers and his team said they will continue their work in the
   burgeoning field of dog-beverage interaction.

   "Our research raises tantalizing questions and opens the door to new
   areas of scientific inquiry," Rogers said. "Does Franklin like mixed
   drinks? Cordials, such as Kahlúa? It's all very, very exciting."

   In addition to the ongoing study, Rogers said that the researchers
   have outlined a future experiment to study the effects of Cannabis
   sativa on Huang's cat, Schrödinger.

