
   WASHINGTON, DC--Gen. Tommy Franks, commander of American forces in the
   wars in Iraq and Afghanistan, announced plans Monday to step down as
   U.S. Central Command chief to focus on solo bombing projects.

   [4]Enlarge Image Gen Tommy Franks Quits Army 

   Gen. Franks tells reporters, "It's time for me to see what I can
   destroy on my own."

   "The years I've spent with the Army have been amazing, and we did some
   fantastic bombing," said Franks at a Pentagon press conference. "But
   at this point, I feel like I've taken it as far as I can. It's time
   for me to move on and see what I can destroy on my own."

   Franks said he is eager to seek out new challenges.

   "Obviously, the U.S. Army is a first-rate organization," Franks said.
   "I mean, when we were on, no one could touch us. The '91 Gulf tour,
   the '95 Bosnia campaign... we kicked some serious ass. But it's
   precisely because I love it so much that I want to leave before it
   starts to get stale."

   Franks said he also relishes the notion of having more creative
   freedom.

   "When you're in an army, you pretty much have to bomb the countries
   they tell you to bomb," Franks said. "Which is fine for a while. But
   eventually, you get tired of bombing the same old places again and
   again. The last thing I want is to be 70 years old, still bombing
   Iraq. It's important to keep things fresh."

   Asked to comment on rumors that he plans to launch a tour of the Far
   East, Franks said he will announce his first solo tour of duty later
   this month. He did mention, however, that he has "always wanted to
   bomb China," but that his work with the U.S. Army afforded him little
   time to do so.

   Elaborating on his dissatisfaction with the Army, Franks said that the
   vast scale of U.S. military operations, while exciting at first,
   eventually became a turn-off.

   "It just got to be so big," Franks said. "You had these massive
   campaigns, with soldiers and generals and tech crews and medical
   staffs and reporters and maintenance engineers and all these other
   people. It was such an elaborate production. I guess I just felt like,
   somewhere along the way, we got away from what it was all about. We
   forgot the thing we all got into it for in the first place: the
   killing."

   Franks said he is eager to strip down the warmaking experience to its
   purest essence.

   [5]Enlarge Image Gen Tommy Franks Quits Army jump 

   Franks rocks Baghdad during the recent Operation Iraqi Freedom tour.

   "I'd really like to get back to my roots," Franks said. "It's exciting
   to put on a big show with M1 Abrams tanks, Bradley fighting vehicles,
   and AH-64 Apache attack helicopters, but I got my first combat
   experience as an artillery officer in Vietnam. Part of me really
   misses being out there in the swamps, just one man and a howitzer."

   "My years with the military have been the best of my life," Franks
   continued. "But when you're at the head of a group, you're always
   considering the entire unit's best interests. Even though you're the
   leader, it can be very stifling. If you get the urge to bomb India or
   Brazil, you can't just go off and do it."

   While he was under contract with the U.S. government, Franks
   occasionally expressed displeasure over having to seek approval from
   the president and Congress for nearly every action he performed.

   "If I want to send a division of jet fighters to Iran, you'd think,
   after all the years I've been doing this, that I could simply make
   that decision," Franks told reporters during a CentCom press briefing
   in February. "But it's not like that."

   In spite of Franks' claim that the decision to leave the army was his,
   some military insiders suspect otherwise.

   "Franks says he quit, but I think that's bullshit," said CNN Pentagon
   correspondent James Washburn. "He got kicked out. Why else would he be
   leaving the best military in the entire world right after their
   triumphant Middle East tour?"

   Franks' relationships with certain key Bush Administration figures
   were "less than perfect," Washburn said.

   "You always got the feeling that [Donald] Rumsfeld and Franks never
   really got along when the cameras were off," Washburn said. "Franks
   always felt like he was in the shadow of Norman Schwarzkopf, the far
   more charismatic general who commanded U.S. forces in the 1991 Gulf
   War."

   Like Franks, Schwarzkopf left the army with plans to pursue a solo
   career, though a lackluster raid on a Japanese fishing village and a
   poorly received attack on the Dominican Republic led to the
   cancellation of a number of solo bombing dates in the Balkans.

   "Schwarzkopf influenced me greatly," Franks said. "I would be honored
   to work with him in the future, should he care to collaborate with me
   outside of the confines of the U.S. Army."

   Though Franks said he is "excited and energized" by his future
   prospects as a solo artist, disappointed fans say the U.S. Army will
   not be the same without him.

   "He wasn't flashy, but he was the backbone of that group," said Marty
   Nevins of Valdosta, GA. "No one will ever forget that moment when he
   decided to launch a massive ground assault on Baghdad rather than
   engage in a prolonged air campaign. That's just good old-fashioned,
   meat-and-potatoes invading. None of this fancy shock-and-awe shit.
   They can bring in somebody else, but I don't think that group's gonna
   be the same with a new frontman."

