
   CHAPEL HILL, NC--A field study released Monday by the University of
   North Carolina School of Public Health suggests that Iraqi citizens
   experience sadness and a sense of loss when relatives, spouses, and
   even friends perish, emotions that have until recently been identified
   almost exclusively with Westerners.
   [4]Enlarge Image Study Iraqis 

   An Iraqi study group reacts to a car bombing. Researchers (not
   pictured) gathered data from a fortified observation booth.

   "We were struck by how an Iraqi reacts to the sight of the bloody or
   decapitated corpse of a family member in a not unlike an American, or
   at the very least a Canadian, would," said Dr. Jonathan Pryztal, chief
   author of the study. "In addition to the rage, bloodlust, and hatred
   we already know to dominate the Iraqi emotional spectrum, it appears
   that they may have some capacity, however limited, for sadness."

   Though Pryztal was quick to add that more detailed analysis is needed,
   he said the findings cast some doubt on long-held assumptions about
   human nature in that region.

   "Contrary to conventional wisdom, it seems that Iraqis do indeed
   experience at least minor feelings of grief when a best friend or a
   grandparent is ripped apart by a car bomb or shot execution style and
   later unearthed in a shallow mass grave," Prytzal said. "Last
   December's suicide-bomb killing of 71 Shiites in Baghdad, for example,
   produced unexpected reactions ranging from crumpled, sobbing despair
   to silent, dazed shock."

   Iraqis have often been observed weeping and wailing in apparent
   anguish, but the study offers evidence indicating this may not be
   exclusively an outward expression of anger or a desire for revenge. It
   also provocatively suggests that this grief can possess an
   American-like personal quality, and is not simply a tribal lamentation
   ritual.
     Study Iraqis jump

   An Iraqi mother expressing American-like grief at the loss of her son.

   Said Pryztal: "When trying to understand the psychology of the Iraqi
   citizenry after four years of war, think of a small American town
   roiled by the death of a well-known high school football player."

   According to Pryztal, the intensity of the grief does not diminish if
   the mourner experiences multiple bereavements over time. "If a woman
   has already lost one child, the subsequent killings of other children
   will evoke similar responses," he said. "In the majority of cases we
   studied, it appeared as though those who lost multiple kids never
   actually got used to it."

   Though Pryztal expects the results of the study may be of some
   interest to students of Arab psychology, he did concede that the data
   may not be entirely accurate because it was gathered directly from
   Iraqis themselves.

   "Almost all the Iraqis we interviewed said the war had ruined their
   lives because of the incalculable loss of friends and family," Pryztal
   said. "But to be totally honest, these types of studies can be skewed
   rather easily by participant exaggeration."

   Psychologists and anthropologists have thus far largely discounted the
   study, claiming it has the same bias as a 1971 Stanford University
   study that concluded that many Vietnamese showed signs of
   psychological trauma from nearly a quarter century of continuous war
   in southeast Asia.

   "We are, in truth, still a long way from determining if Iraqis are
   exhibiting actual, U.S.-grade sadness," Mayo Clinic neuropsychologist
   Norman Blum said. "At present, we see no reason for the popular press
   to report on Iraqi emotions as if they are real."

   Pryztal said that his research group would next examine whether
   children in Sudan prefer playing with toys or serving as guerrilla
   fighters and killing innocent civilians.

