
   DALLAS--A western honeybee measuring barely one-quarter of an inch in
   length and weighing approximately .03 ounces triggered panic among a
   gathering of six fully-grown Homo sapiens during a picnic at Davis
   Park on Monday, witnesses reported.

   "Where is it--where is it?" said 44-year-old general manager Charles
   Freid, who has been described by his coworkers and business rivals as
   "ruthless," after the bee happened to fly in his general direction.
   "Get it off me! Is it on me?"
   [4]Enlarge Image Single Bee 

   Dallas' Davis Park on Monday afternoon, still abandoned hours after
   the bee enounter. Inset: the bee.

   "Jesus!" added Freid, screaming and flailing his arms as he raced to
   his car, got inside, and locked the doors.

   The college-educated humans, all of whom are not allergic to bee-sting
   venom and possess both cerebral and muscular capacities several orders
   of magnitude beyond that of the insect, proceeded to retreat in abject
   fright from its half-millimeter stinger, which, when used, causes a
   twinge of discomfort followed by mild irritation and kills the bee.

   According to entomologists at the University of Texas at Dallas, the
   Apis mellifera was most likely trying to pollinate a nearby cluster of
   dandelions and was not, as alleged by 50-year-old attorney Georgia
   Sakko, who has twice endured the pain of childbirth and successfully
   battled breast cancer, "out to get us."

   "Don't make it angry--don't make it angry!" Sakko said. "Is it in my
   hair? I feel something in my hair. Somebody get it out. Get it out!"

   Airline pilot Mike Grunwold, 49, who is approximately 1,224 times the
   size of the bee, said that he was "certain" the bee had landed on
   Sakko's back. Fiber tests on Sakko's clothing later found no traces of
   a bee's presence, but did reveal a small piece of lint and matted hair
   that may have resembled an insect at a distance and in certain lights.

   Civil engineer, marathon runner, and Gulf War veteran Scott Fogel, 39,
   briefly attempted to use force against the bee's non-aggressive
   actions, waving it away with a paper plate. After accidently upending
   a container of potato salad, which caused the bee to suddenly swerve,
   Fogel leaped back several feet and dashed for cover behind a trash
   can.

   "They're attracted to sweat," Fogel said. "It makes them want to kill.
   Just try to keep as far away from it as you can."

   After the bee seemingly disappeared, the humans--members of a species
   that has crossed an Ice Age land bridge from Asia to North America,
   domesticated the wolf, built the pyramids, and landed a manned vehicle
   on the surface of the moon--walked cautiously back to the picnic area.

   "I think it's gone," personal trainer Marcus Weller, 32, said. "Thank
   God."

   A few seconds later, the bee emerged from an overturned Coke can,
   prompting the humans to scream and retreat once more. They opted not
   to return to the area, abandoning several hundred dollars' worth of
   food and picnicking equipment. The brutalized parkgoers characterized
   the day as "totally ruined."

   The bee, which was reportedly never more than vaguely aware of the
   presence of other living organisms besides the blooming plants it
   sought, eventually returned to its hive without incident.

