
   CAMP FALLUJAH, IRAQ--Once widely acknowledged as the most crucial and
   compelling news story in the world, the U.S. military occupation of
   Iraq was, for the first time in the conflict's five-year history,
   deemed too uninteresting to be considered among 2007's most important
   news events.
   [4]Enlarge Image Iraq War 

   Some soldiers stand around barely making news.

   According to polls, the war, which claimed American and Iraqi lives at
   a record rate throughout the past year, had simply grown too
   repetitive to warrant more than a passing recognition. For 57
   consecutive months, viewers across the country were subjected to
   monotonous and tedious roadside bombings, predictable charges of
   corruption and negligence against private contractors, and a chaotic,
   hard-to-understand political situation that never seemed to change.

   "Is that still going on?" 46-year-old Dayton, OH resident Jim Svaboda
   asked about the war, which many were told would be ending as early as
   May 2003. "Absolutely nothing new has happened over there in months.
   Even the soldiers are tired of it."

   In September, a massive march against the war drew hundreds of
   thousands of protesters to the nation's capital, but failed to capture
   the attention of most major news outlets. And despite the insistence
   of a number of observers and political analysts that the war in Iraq
   was actually getting better, viewers continued to turn away by the
   millions.

   "The average consumer can only read so many articles about 18-month
   redeployments that keep soldiers away from their families for years,
   or the lack of decent body armor, before they just tune out
   completely," said Kris Duncan, professor of media studies at Brandeis
   University. "That kind of thing might have seemed fresh two years ago,
   but people today want something unexpected. Frankly, if I have to
   watch one more clip of amputee footage from Iraq, I'm going to be
   sick."

   Political blogger Janet Friedberg, of HotUpdateNow.com, agreed.

   "The Iraq war is so over," Friedberg said. "Even if it goes on for
   another 10 years."

   Some Washington-based supporters of the war said they were confident
   they could regain public interest in 2008 by pumping hundreds of
   billions of dollars into the conflict.

