
   SACRAMENTO, CA--Claiming that it is "something every man deserves to
   do once," local resident Carl Hilland, 32, told reporters Monday that,
   before he dies, he would like to throw a good, clean punch to
   somebody's face.
   [4]Enlarge Image Area Man Hopes 

   Hilland stands on a street that would be a perfect location for such a
   punch.

   "I want to make a guy's head snap back like in the movies," Hilland
   said. "All I want is the satisfaction of knowing that at one point in
   my life, I threw a straight right hand with complete balance and
   didn't look foolish doing it, and in a situation where my actions were
   completely justified."

   "Pow," he added, punching the air. "I honestly don't think that's too
   much to ask."

   Hilland, who is right-handed, characterized the ideal punch as "quick
   and clean," adding that he has no interest in throwing a "crazy"
   punch, such as an uppercut or a left hook. The husband and father of
   three also insisted that he is realistic in his expectations for the
   punch, and does not want to cause permanent damage or knock the victim
   out immediately. All he wants, Hillard said, is to throw the punch at
   an age when he will at least be able to "stun the guy a little."

   "This isn't about cowardice, hysteria, or blind rage," Hilland said.
   "It's about me, as a man, getting the chance to act like a man for
   once in my life."

   Hilland, who works as a group benefits consultant and characterizes
   himself as "pretty reserved," said that the approximately five punches
   he has thrown through the years don't count because of their
   nonviolent nature and social context. In each case, he was either
   hitting a friend in response to seeing a car with a burnt-out
   headlight or testing how much force he could generate with only a
   two-inch windup.

   "I did punch a wall once," said Hilland, who admitted that he took
   little satisfaction in it. "First off, I was just trying to make a
   scene, and everyone knew it. And secondly, a little scuff mark isn't
   the same as seeing blood stream out of a guy's nose, which is what I
   think will happen if I really get all my weight behind it."

   Added Hilland, attempting another air swing: "Boom."

   Hilland said the primary obstacle he faces is that he is seldom, if
   ever, in a position to punch anyone. He has not been in an angry
   physical altercation since the fourth grade, and even during those
   years was impeded by an unspoken "no-face" rule during fights. As a
   result, almost all schoolyard clashes consisted of one contestant
   wrestling the other to the ground while administering a headlock.

   "There was some whaling on people's backs, but it was all pretty
   sloppy," he said."And besides, a punch isn't really a punch unless you
   hit a person, then immediately shake your hand because the impact was
   surprisingly painful. Right?"

   The best-case scenario, which Hilland outlined at length, would
   include throwing the defining blow while defending his wife when "lots
   of people are watching." However, in order to carry the necessary
   psychological weight, the situation "has to happen organically,"
   Hilland said.

   "I'm just going to go on with my day-to-day routine and be patient,"
   Hilland added, though sources at his workplace noted that lately he
   seems to be escalating verbal disputes rather than defusing them. "I
   would even settle for hitting someone in the stomach, but it would
   have to be one of those body shots where they fall to the ground after
   gasping for air for a few seconds."

   "No, forget that," he continued. "It has to be to the face."

