
   PHILADELPHIA--Frustrated with the Eagles' last-second 16-13 loss to
   the Green Bay Packers last Sunday, and with quarterback Donovan
   McNabb's failure to single-handedly score three touchdowns, prevent
   two of his teammates from muffing punts, or block any of Green Bay's
   field goals, thousands of Philadelphia fans demanded that McNabb win
   an NFL championship for Philadelphia sometime within the next three
   weeks.
   [4]Enlarge Image Donovan McNabb 

   "For the last time: How much longer do we have to wait for McNabb to
   get off his ass?" Eagles fan Jacob Wilkerson said of the five-time Pro
   Bowler in one of over 1,500 messages addressed to the quarterback left
   on the Eagles' voicemail Monday. "Come on McNabb, it's time to finish
   the job. We've been really lenient up to this point, but it's time to
   hunker down and throw the ball. If you think you need to take the
   whole three weeks, that's fine, but we would really like it by next
   Wednesday."

   While many football analysts agree that McNabb has done a phenomenally
   good job in a less-than-ideal situation for the last eight years,
   blaming Philadelphia's failure to advance to the Super Bowl on such
   varied areas as undisciplined offensive execution, inconsistent
   defense, excessive penalties, lackluster pass protection, and almost
   criminally bad play-calling, fans say they are tired of people making
   excuses for McNabb.

   "So what's our crybaby quarterback going to blame next, the NFL
   schedule?" fan Ed Cooke said in a call to Radio 610WIP's Howard Eskin.
   "He's the quarterback. If the team sucks, it's his fault. I think
   McNabb's lucky we're only asking for one Super Bowl in the next few
   weeks, because what he owes us is a three-peat by December."

   Although he felt McNabb performed respectably, completing 15 of 33
   passes for 184 yards with one touchdown and one interception in his
   first game back since tearing his ACL last season, Eagles head coach
   Andy Reid pointed out that his quarterback would have to put up much
   better numbers if he expected to put them in the position to win it
   all by the end of Week 4.

   "This organization expects a lot from Donovan," Reid told a group of
   angry fans Wednesday. "After all, we did use the second overall draft
   pick on him eight years ago, and while he's done really well
   considering we made him run the offense for years with bargain-
   basement wide receivers and running backs that couldn't stay healthy,
   I agree that now is the time to finally get something back on our
   investment."

   "Donovan promised us--the Eagles organization and fans alike--great
   things," said Eagles owner Jeff Lurie, who promised season ticket
   holders he would sit down with McNabb and make fans' wishes known.
   "You have all really been great through all of this. No one could ask
   for a better, more caring, more patient home crowd. The amount of
   restraint you have shown by not, say, throwing McNabb off the top deck
   of Lincoln Financial Field is nothing but admirable."

   "For my part, I can promise that on Sept. 30 I will make sure that
   Donovan has the Lombardi trophy on my desk no later than the end of
   the day," added Lurie, noting that he thought the Eagles' fans were
   the best fans in the world.

   McNabb, whose plans for this week include extra time working with his
   receivers on timing, studying his playbook, and watching film, said he
   would be working as hard as he could for the foreseeable future.

   "Eagles fans are a passionate group who love their team," said McNabb,
   "if not the actual players. It's not like winning a Super Bowl before
   the first month of the season is the hardest thing they've ever asked
   of me. That'd be all those times they asked me to go kill myself."

   "If I work hard and play my game, I'll be fine," McNabb added. "I just
   hope the fans realize that."

