
   LOS ANGELES-Libertarian Party officials announced Monday that their
   2000 National Convention will be held August 18-20 in an efficiency
   apartment just off La Brea Avenue in Los Angeles.

   [4]Enlarge Image L.A. Efficiency Chosen 

   A worker makes preparations for the upcoming 2000 Libertarian
   Convention.

   "As one of the nation's largest cities, Los Angeles provides an ideal
   stage for us to spread our message of personal and economic
   self-governance," said Libertarian national director Steve Dasbach,
   explaining his party's choice of venue at a kitchenette press
   conference. "Also, it was [Libertarian Party national chairman] David
   [Bergland]'s turn to host, since it was held at my place in '96."

   The convention is expected to be the largest in party history, drawing
   upwards of 45 Libertarians to the second-floor apartment in the
   Mulholland Terrace complex. In preparation for the event, 15 extra
   folding chairs have been ordered by party leaders, as well as 12
   two-liter bottles of Pepsi, Sprite, and Diet Mountain Dew.

   "It is our belief that government's role is simply to defend the
   citizen from coercion and violence, and nothing more," said
   Libertarian presidential candidate Harry Browne, hanging a
   "Browne-Olivier 2000" banner above the efficiency's futon. "That means
   military service should be voluntary, the minimum wage should be
   eliminated, and taxes should be replaced with user fees for services."

   Added Browne: "Feel free to take our two-minute quiz to find out if
   you're a Libertarian and don't even know it."

   "We hold that all individuals have the right to exercise sole dominion
   over their own lives, and have the right to live in whatever manner
   they choose, so long as they do not forcibly interfere with the equal
   rights of others," said Dasbach, wearing a "Repeal All Sex Laws"
   button on his lapel. "This August, that ideal will pass from Apartment
   12B to the world."

   With one month to go before the convention, the Libertarian platform
   is set. The party will demand an end to government subsidies for
   businesses and farms, the elimination of patrols at U.S. borders, and
   the decriminalization of crack cocaine. Party members also support the
   making of traffic signals "recommended but not mandatory," as well as
   a plan to move America's heavy industry to platforms in low Earth
   orbit by 2007.

     L.A. Efficiency Chosen jump

   The Ohio and Vermont delegations rally during the 1996 Libertarian
   Convention.

   Despite such philosophical unity, some decisions still need to be made
   before the convention. Seating arrangements are in flux as organizers
   await word of the pro-LSD lobby's attendance, as well as that of the
   Illinois delegation's wife. Pizza toppings also remain up in the air,
   with a key bloc of five Southern delegates favoring pepperoni over the
   more popular mushroom-and-green-pepper for the planned six extra-large
   pies.

   "The number of topics and speakers on our agenda was the reason we
   couldn't hold the convention at the Ventura Boulevard Denny's as
   originally planned," said Holly Pfizer, convention co-chair and one of
   the nation's leading advocates of the privatization of police. "Plus,
   they add a 15 percent gratuity for parties of eight or more, and that
   would have severely depleted our campaign war chest."

   A portion of the money saved by not holding the convention at Denny's
   will go toward the featured entertainment, a live performance by
   singer Don Henley that was recorded in 1998 and will be played on the
   apartment's stereo.

   "Whenever you have this many Libertarians in one place, there's going
   to be some disagreement," said author and gun-control opponent William
   McPeters, who will deliver a speech titled, "Why I Abandoned The GOP,
   And How America's Drug-Legalization Activists Can Profit From The
   Coming Economic Devaluation." "But if America's Libertarians join
   together as a strong, unified force, well, there's just no limit to
   what 57 people can accomplish."

