
   COLUMBUS, OH--The Columbus Health Department closed the Mexican fast
   food restaurant Burrito Max on Monday after it failed a routine
   inspection, completely neglecting to take into account  the fact that
   the popular, conveniently located establishment was a perfectly good
   burrito place that served kick-ass burritos at a totally cheap price.
   [4]Enlarge Image Health Department 

   Hungry for a burrito? Too damn bad, health officials say.

   "The food there was just fine," said bike messenger Seth Sherwood, 25,
   adding that he "almost never got sick" after eating at Burrito Max.
   "This is bullshit. I bet those health guys have never even tried one
   of their Grande Texas Chili Extremes."

   According to a report filed by city food-safety inspector Dan
   Griffith, Burrito Max, a cheap, no-frills eatery that never aspired to
   be anything it wasn't, had a handful of very small, practically
   insignificant health-code violations, such as vermin on the premises,
   a persistent foul odor, traces of E. coli, and unsanitary food-contact
   surfaces and equipment--like what restaurant in this city doesn't.

   The report, however, did not mention the restaurant's free drink
   refills and the signature chili-cheese fries, which, according to
   restaurant regulars, were "awesome."

   "If those guys got a bad burrito, they should have just asked for
   another one instead of writing the place up like a bunch of little
   bitches," said Ohio State University sophomore Greg Hall, 19, who,
   like a lot of customers, didn't absolutely love the food, but found it
   more than serviceable, especially during lunch, after bar time, or
   when he was craving a burrito. "If they really want to help me out,
   here's an idea: They could open up another burrito place, keep it open
   until 4 a.m., and call it Burrito Max."

   Though the report cited the employees' habit of not wearing hairnets
   or shirts and showing up to work "in a generally unhygienic state," it
   overlooked the fact that the heavily pierced and tattooed staff added
   to the authentic, laid-back atmosphere of Burrito Max. Most
   importantly, the place served solid, hearty,  burritos fast and hot,
   something most burrito joints in the area do not. In addition, the
   line to order was never too long.

   "I didn't go to Burrito Max because it was clean," copy shop assistant
   Rachael Grimaldi, 26, said. "I went because my friends worked there,
   the tofu burrito was cheap, and they had a bike rack outside the front
   entrance."

   Had health department officials bothered to interview Burrito Max's
   patrons, they would have learned these things, rather than just
   dwelling on the dirty floors--which people don't eat off of, last time
   anyone checked--and the consistently out-of-order bathroom with the
   hilarious "Fuck You" carved into the "Employees Must Wash Hands" sign.

   "I'm sure the risk of food-borne illnesses wasn't as big a deal as
   they made it out to be," said 24-year-old legal assistant Deirdre
   Sarnoff upon hearing that the restaurant's poultry and beef were
   stored at improper temperatures. "It's not like I ever bit into a
   cockroach or anything. Where am I supposed to eat now, some overpriced
   corporate burrito chain like Chipotle?"

   "Christ," Sarnoff added. "It seems like every time I find a cheap
   place that's open past midnight the stupid city comes along and shuts
   it down."

   Burrito Max is not the only local eatery to be unfairly shuttered by
   the Health Department in recent months. In March, Cecilia's Pizza was
   shut down for rat feces and a lack of properly covered waste
   receptacles, despite its sweet $3.99 deal that included two slices of
   cheese pizza and a medium drink. Two weeks ago, the Indian Buffet,
   located in the basement of an apartment building on 595 Commonwealth
   Ave., was closed for unsanitary conditions, though, according to
   patrons, the food quality was "still pretty decent" even after the big
   grease fire they had there last August.

