
   WASHINGTON, DC--In an emblematic move intended to stand in for the
   official symbolic reprimand of the president, a vehemently
   well-mannered mob of demonstrators censured an effigy of George W.
   Bush Tuesday, making known its displeasure over such actions as
   illegal wiretapping and the politically motivated firing of federal
   lawyers.
   [4]Enlarge Image Civilized Mob 

   An activist holds aloft the censure motion so that all in the crowd
   can read it carefully and make up their minds.

   Armed with neatly lettered signs, and umbrellas in the event of rain,
   the group milled about the Capitol for several hours, chanting the
   anti-Bush slogans "Bush Must Go Through The Same Channels As Any Other
   President to Take Military Action--That Actually Falls Under Congress'
   Purview" and "Down With The Idea Of Executive Privilege, Both In
   General And As It Relates To Bush" before performing the mock censure.

   Although some members of the crowd initially incited a metaphorical
   impeachment of the president, a majority felt that would be far too
   harsh a symbolic action to take. After agreeing on the censure, the
   decorous riffraff whipped themselves into a relative frenzy and
   clamored single file to the National Mall with the meticulously
   crafted Bush effigy.

   "Things really got out of hand after we drafted and considered the
   resolution and then presented it to the mock House Judiciary
   Committee," participant Patrick Firth said about the mob's public
   representation of a procedure that neither directly affects the
   presidency nor carries any particular legal consequences. "After we
   finally adopted the motion to proceed, there was no turning back. I
   felt like I was watching someone else edit and redraft the approved
   measure."

   The Bush effigy, a surprisingly accurate likeness outfitted in a blue
   suit and red power tie, was originally to be taken to the steps of the
   Capitol Building for the censure proceedings. The mob turned back,
   however, when one among the rabble called a point of order and
   explained that the president would not be present if Congress were
   actually to pass censure. The crowd then unanimously moved to postpone
   its mock Senate vote until a detailed facsimile of the Oval Office
   could be constructed on the lawn of the Mall and the effigy placed
   inside it.
   [5]Enlarge Image Civilized Mob Jump 

   Unruly pro-censure radicals in Washington. One observer described the
   atmosphere as "rife with umbrage."

   Censure then appeared inevitable, until a faction of the horde
   brandished effigies of Republican senators and mounted a filibuster.

   "It was a scary couple hours," said demonstrator Harold Lemarche, who
   helped beat back the stonewalling tactic after a long but orderly
   debate. "There was even some talk of abandoning Robert's Rules of
   Order. It's a good thing the mock senators were able to muster the
   three-fifths majority vote required to defeat the filibuster, or this
   thing could have gotten real ugly, real fast."

   When the measure finally passed, the news was officially delivered to
   the effigy and a large banner reading "CENSURED!" was hung above it.
   This was followed by several minutes of silent pointing and glaring
   before the crowd slowly dispersed.

   Democratic leaders were quick to distance themselves from the subdued
   riot out of fear that condoning even a meta-symbolic political rebuke
   would alienate some of their more mild-mannered constituents.

   "We understand that many Americans are frustrated with the current
   administration, but that doesn't mean they should be staging a
   constitutionally mandated political procedure on the streets of our
   nation's capital," House Speaker Nancy Pelosi said. "We urge you,
   please do not take the letter of the law into your own hands. Instead,
   write firm but polite correspondence to your congressional
   representatives."

   Top Republicans loudly denounced the censure.

   "This is exactly the kind of vicious, unbridled, restrained
   indignation we can expect if Democrats stay in power," Senate Minority
   Whip Trent Lott said. "Where will this behavior end--a mock
   no-confidence vote against the surgeon general?"

   According to witnesses, police were present at the scene of the
   figurative censure but were powerless to stop the mob, as all of the
   paperwork required to stage the demonstration had been filed weeks
   earlier.

