
   DETROIT--Violent decapitations and permanent paralysis due to severing
   of the spinal cord are among the reasons cited by the Chrysler
   Corporation for its decision to recall all '97 automobiles containing
   the "neckbelts" safety feature.

   [4]Enlarge Image Chrysler Halts Production Of Neckbelts 

   Passengers in a '97 Chrysler LeBaron wear neckbelts, which were
   recalled Monday for causing explosive decapitations, launching
   victims' severed heads through windshields at upwards of 200 mph.

   "In the case of collision, it would appear that the neckbelts have a
   detrimental effect on overall passenger safety," read a statement
   released by the company Monday.

   The recall, the most expensive in Chrysler's history, goes into effect
   early next week. In the meantime, the company is advising all
   motorists who use the neck belts to maintain a defensive driving
   stance at all times, as accidents may result in "crushed trachea,
   severe spinal and/or brain damage, and, in the most severe cases,
   sudden defenestration of the head area, as the entire region above the
   neck separates from the upper body, flying at tremendous speed through
   the breakaway glass of the windshield, rolling several yards into the
   street directly in front of the car," the Chrysler press release
   stated.

   The neckbelts were developed with passenger safety in mind, say
   Chrysler spokespersons. "Our research showed that one of the biggest
   risks to motorists is the danger of passengers sustaining head
   injuries by striking the dashboard or the seat in front of them as
   their bodies are flung forward during a crash," Chrysler safety
   designer Robert McArdle said. "Our thinking was that by immobilizing
   the head and neck, this type of injury would decrease significantly."

   The belts, McArdle said, were also intended to reduce the neck stress
   associated with whiplash. "Unfortunately, it appears that we were
   erroneous in this analysis as well," he added. "Even minor
   fender-benders seem to cause motorists wearing neckbelts to have their
   entire heads forcibly ripped from their torsos, landing in the front
   seat to the shocked screams of terrified onlookers."

   Another negative side effect of the neckbelts is the psychological
   damage that may be suffered by eyewitnesses upon observing a
   convulsing, headless human body spontaneously jettison fountains of
   blood as the adrenaline-maximized heart furiously pumps quart after
   quart from the neck wound, coating the car interior, the Chrysler
   statement continued.

   Neckbelt wearers are warned that a severed human head may remain alive
   for up to two minutes before blood loss, oxygen starvation and shock
   trauma cause it to lose consciousness.

   "Brain death is something science still knows very little about," said
   Chrysler safety engineer Tom Savini, "but drivers should take note
   that law enforcement personnel have reported observing bouncing,
   rolling severed heads blinking their eyes and gasping for air as if
   attempting to speak minutes after separation from the torso on more
   than one occasion."

   Savini said that such still-alive severed human heads "probably live
   out their last moments in a state of unimaginable agony," and urged
   caution on the part of drivers who wear the neckbelt device.

   In addition to decapitation and paralysis, some consumer advocates
   have complained that the neckbelt safety devices inhibit side-to-side
   motion of the head, causing drivers to swerve wildly back and forth in
   order to maintain a clear view of the street. Other negative side
   effects cited include difficulty in breathing, eating and talking.

   In the wake of industry-wide concern about the safety of the
   neckbelts, Chrysler is also reexamining the so-called "shrapnelizing"
   explosive dashboard which became a standard safety option on all new
   models in 1995.

   "By splintering into literally thousands of rapidly spinning jagged
   fragments, which ricochet around the car's interior at tremendous
   speeds, tearing any living tissue inside to shreds in seconds, these
   dashboards may represent a significant safety risk to motorists," read
   a report submitted to CEO Robert Eaton by a Chrysler safety
   engineering team.

   Many observers are comparing the Chrysler recall to the controversy
   surrounding the 1976 Ford Pinto, the economy-model compact which, when
   rear-ended, ignited its fuel tanks and became doused in flaming
   gasoline, causing passengers to ineffectually pound on the windows and
   scream as they were burned alive at superheated temperatures within,
   before exploding as a bomb does.

