
   NEW YORK--A television commercial for Nabisco's Fig Newton bars that
   debuted Friday preys on a wide range of innate human weaknesses, from
   greed and gluttony to the compulsive need for self-gratification in an
   otherwise cold and uncaring world, industry sources reported Monday.

   "Flattery, pride, self-aggrandizement, fear of rejection: This latest
   Fig Newtons ad campaign fires on all cylinders," advertising executive
   and CNBC talk-show host Donny Deutsch said. "It has nothing but
   contempt for its target audience, its exploitative nature borders on
   the unethical, and it's one of the most brilliant marketing strategies
   in years."
   [4]Enlarge Image New Fig 

   One of the most egregiously manipulative shots from the latest Fig
   Newtons TV spot.

   Though the mise-en-scène of the 20-second spot is simple enough--an
   overworked suburban mother experiences a dream of paradise while
   biting into a Fig Newton, oblivious to her overflowing washing machine
   and four raucous children--it reaches consumers from every age group
   and background, as well as those suffering from all forms of fear,
   regret, and crippling uncertainty.

   "Mmmm," intones a tellingly paternalistic narrator, masterfully
   invoking humanity's pained longing for a supreme truth and its often
   reckless pursuit of short-term solutions. "So chewy! So delicious! So
   completely irresistible!"

   "Isn't it time you took a Fig Newtons break?" the commercial
   continues, ruthlessly preying on mankind's escapist tendencies and
   seizing upon several deep-seated self-destructive impulses.

   Although the first 10 seconds alone employ enough psychological
   gambits to sway even the most emotionally secure viewer, Nabisco's
   latest ad leaves little to chance, tapping into bedrock human faults
   like susceptibility to guilt and the slavish desire for acceptance to
   push the sale of its fig-filled treats.

   "It's a perfect, wholesome snack for any time of the day," the
   commercial eagerly announces, while the image of a young
   child--himself a physical representation of purity--tempts viewers
   with the prospect of recapturing their long-lost sense of innocence.
   "Fig Newtons are ooey-gooey great!"

   "Go on, you deserve it!" the psychologically manipulative onslaught
   persists, at once addressing, encouraging, and currying feelings of
   inferiority and self-doubt that have been a mainstay of the human
   condition for the past 6,000 years.

   "Fig Newtons--it's not a cookie, it's fruit and cake!" the
   advertisement finally concludes, subliminally appealing to consumers
   who have long yearned to break free of the confining categories into
   which society has placed them, and for whom even a commercially
   available dessert might symbolize the individuality they so intensely
   seek.

   According to marketing media analyst Glenda Howth, besides plumbing
   the depths of the human psyche, Nabisco's latest commercial also takes
   advantage of phenomena unique to modern society.

   "Nabisco shrewdly taps into a mother's conflict between wanting to
   care for her children while still retaining her pre-maternal sense of
   freedom and identity," Howth said. "Add an emphasis on the fat-free
   qualities of the snack that appeals to one's vanity and plays upon the
   often shallow connection made between physical attraction and
   self-worth in today's world, and you have one very powerful ad."

   Brown University psychology professor Scott Luchs concurred with
   Howth's assessment.

   "This might be the most subconsciously manipulative commercial I've
   seen since Procter & Gamble used man's fear of death to market Crest
   toothpaste," Luchs said. "In time, this ad could even rival M&M's 1983
   campaign of jealousy, resentment, and the need for human
   companionship."

   Although the true effectiveness of the commercial has yet to be seen,
   early figures from Nabisco indicate a nearly 4 percent sales increase
   among many prized demographics, including unmarried women ages 18 to
   37 who desperately wish to have a family, single men between the ages
   25 and 40 who suffer from unresolved abandonment issues, and girls in
   the 7-10 age bracket who already possess debilitating body image
   concerns.

   "I used to think Fig Newtons were bland and tasteless," said Martha
   Waterson, a recent divorcée from Aberdeen, MD who is reflexively
   averse to change, is governed by prejudice and assumption, blindly
   trusts authority, believes in retribution, desires reassurance, is
   guilty of envy, lies to avoid hurtful truths, and suffers from
   separation and alienation anxiety. "Now I can't stop eating them."

   "I guess you never really know someone, huh?" Waterson added.

