
   MANAUS, BRAZIL--An international team of scientists conducting
   research in the Amazon River Basin announced the discovery of a
   formerly unknown primate species inhabiting a remote jungle area
   roughly 300 miles from Manaus Monday. According to scientists in
   Manaus, the new species, Ateles saporis, is "an amazing biological
   find" and "incredibly delectable."

   [4]Enlarge Image species 

   A member of Ateles saporis, which scientists say tastes excellent
   broiled (below).

   "We couldn't be more thrilled!" German researcher Dr. Jerome Keller
   told reporters Tuesday. "Very few scientists are lucky enough to
   discover a new species, let alone a mammal with a palatability on par
   with a tender, juicy steak."

   "This is a seriously tasty creature," Keller added.

   Although the creature resembles a large kitten, as a member of the
   Ateles genus, it is more closely related to wooly and spider monkeys.
   Ateles saporis, informally known as the delicacy ape, is a
   tree-dwelling herbivore that can measure up to a meter from head to
   tail. The adult delicacy ape weighs between 35 and 40 pounds and
   tastes wonderful with a currant glaze.

   Keller said the new species boasts a gular sac, a distinctive trait
   that separates it from other species in the Ateles genus.

   "The gular sac is a throat pouch that can be inflated, allowing the
   animal to make loud calls that resonate through the treetops," Keller
   said. "More importantly, the pouch can be stuffed with nuts or dried
   fruits prior to roasting."

   Biologist Jeanette Bransky, who served as the research team's chief
   archivist, presented a series of slides showing delicacy apes
   cavorting in trees, caring for their young, and sitting thinly sliced
   on a platter next to roasted red potatoes.

   "After careful study, we have determined that Ateles saporis is a very
   insulated species," Bransky said. "All of their food needs are met in
   the treetops. They're docile, affectionate creatures with a
   non-competitive social structure. They often sit grooming each other
   for hours on end, which explains why their meat is so marbled and
   tender."

   [5]Enlarge Image Species Jump 

   This marks the first primate species discovered since the nearly
   inedible Arunachal macaque was found in India last year.

   "In our studies of the delicacy ape, we have noted several traits,
   such as play activities, that are almost human," Bransky said.
   "However, the similarities do not run much deeper than that. Take the
   loin, for example. Unlike a human's, it's so savory and delicate that
   it can be eaten just like sashimi."

   "Raw or cooked, this species is one of the greatest discoveries of the
   21st century," added Bransky, licking her lips.

   The team plans to research the species for another two months and then
   publish its findings in both the International Journal Of Primatology
   and Bon Appétit.

   "We still need to complete an accurate population-density study,"
   Keller said. "We assume that their habitat is limited to the Amazon
   and that their total number is very small. We need to gather data
   quickly, as the species is almost certainly facing extinction. I mean,
   it's that good."

   Keller said the discovery of the delicacy ape underscores the
   importance of protecting delicate ecosystems from mass deforestation.

   "The Amazon River Basin boasts the greatest biodiversity in the world,
   with countless potentially tasty species waiting to be discovered,"
   Keller said. "As for the delicacy ape, I only hope there's something
   we can do to preserve it. Maybe we can get them to breed in captivity.
   Generations to come should have the opportunity to enjoy the taste of
   this majestic creature."

