
   MIDDLE EAST--With the Iraq war in its fifth year, the war in
   Afghanistan in its sixth, and  conflict between Israel and the rest of
   the region continuing unabated for more than half a century,
   intelligence sources are warning that a new wave of violence in the
   Middle East may soon blah blah blah, etc. etc., you know the rest.
   [4]Enlarge Image Middle East 

   Yet another act of violence in response to something else terrible
   that occurred in, oh, let's say Basra.

   "Tensions in the region are extremely high," said U.S. Ambassador to
   Iraq Ryan Crocker, who added the same old same old while answering
   reporters' questions. "We're disappointed by the events of the last
   few months, but we're confident that we're about to [yakety yakety
   yak]."

   The U.N. has issued a strongly worded whatever denouncing someone or
   something presumably having to do with the vicious explosive things
   that raged across this, or shattered the predawn calm of that, or
   ripped suddenly through the other, killing umpteen innocent civilians
   in a Jerusalem bus or Beirut discotheque or Fallujah mosque or
   whatever it was this time.
   [5]Enlarge Image Middle East jump 

   Either a car bomb killed people or a car hit a roadside bomb, killing
   people.

   In the aftermath of a whole series of incidents, there have also been
   troubling reports of just fill in the blanks. Middle East experts say
   the still somehow worsening situation has inflamed age-old sectarian
   tensions between the Sunnis, Shiites, Semites, Kurds, Turks, Saudis,
   Persians, Wahhabis, radicals, extremists, Baathists, mullahs, clerics,
   et al, which is likely to lead to more gurgle-gurgle over the coming
   weeks and months.

   A certain number of U.S. troops were also killed somewhere in some
   tragic fashion, while a much greater number were wounded. Meanwhile,
   impoverished or oppressed supporters of whichever faction carried out
   the attack or ambush probably celebrated, angering an angry U.S.
   public that is already angry. Locals are calling for an investigation
   into excessive force or outright corruption by military or political
   officials on one of the 15 sides of the various conflicts, although
   the implicated party has categorically denied wrongdoing, just like
   they always do, without fail, every time this happens, which is daily,
   it seems.

   And in Afghanistan, the Taliban.

   In Israel, Palestinians and Israelis escalated tensions and so on and
   so on ad infinitum, ad eternum, and some say, ad absurdum, and
   although Hamas released a statement condemning Israeli forces for the
   resulting civilian deaths, Israeli officials say the teens were armed
   with rocket launchers, though it doesn't really matter.

   Also, Ahmadinejad, Iran's nuclear program, bin Laden at large, Moqtada
   al-Sadr, Moqtada al-Sadr's militia, Fallujah, renegade mullahs,
   embedded and/or beheaded journalists, oil revenues, stockpiles of
   former Soviet armaments, freedom, racism, Halliburton, women's role in
   Islamic society, the Quran, withdrawing troops, economic disparities,
   Sikhs, Pakistanis, oil, rebuilding, stories of hope, the Saudi royal
   family, the Holy Land, insurgents, and the tragedy of Sept. 11th.

   In an attempt to increase public support of whatever the fuck it is he
   thinks he's doing, President Bush trotted out the same old whoop-de-do
   you've heard over and over at a solemn-yet-resolute speech attended by
   soldiers, or religious leaders, or firemen, or some mix of
   ethnic-looking people from one of those countries.

   "We have to give this plan time to wop bop a loo bop, a wop bam boom,
   ah ah ting tang walla walla bing bang," President Bush may as well
   have said. "May God [help/bless/save] the United States of America."

