
   LOS ANGELES--Suspended Tennessee Titans cornerback Adam "Pac-Man"
   Jones called a press conference Tuesday in order to emphasize that he
   will be nowhere near a possibly fatal stabbing that will occur during
   a fight involving several members of his entourage and the bartender
   at an L.A.-area strip club this coming Friday.
   [4]Enlarge Image Pacman Jones 

   "I just want people to know that I'm not going to be present at
   Shaker's, the club where possibly about to be deceased chump-ass
   bartender Darrent Wilson has been known to exchange harsh language and
   threats with my known associates, including kicking me and my people
   out of his establishment," said Jones, who is also currently being
   questioned by police concerning a recent shooting at an Atlanta strip
   club and is currently on suspension from the NFL following a melee and
   shooting in February at a Las Vegas strip club. "I am sorry for what
   is about to happen to this man, who will be in the wrong place at the
   wrong time, but it will have had nothing to do with me."

   Jones also took the opportunity to appeal once more to the NFL for
   leniency in a case of what he called "bad luck."

   "I will be going to bed at midnight on Friday anyway, and the
   gentleman in question will not be knifed until about 3 a.m.," Jones
   added. "And about Wednesday I'm deciding to give up strip clubs
   anyway, since bad stuff can happen there, especially when employees
   act unreasonable. Just because I know the guys who will be there when
   this happens doesn't necessarily mean I knew it was going to happen."

   The fight, which sources close to Jones say will apparently start as
   an argument over a woman, will involve Wilson and at least three
   as-yet unidentified members of Jones' group, although witnesses will
   not be able to place Jones at the scene. When contacted about the
   incident, Jones plans to promise to cooperate with authorities in
   their investigation and pray for Wilson's speedy recovery, if the
   bartender is alive at the time.

   Jones stressed that no charges have yet been filed against him, saying
   that, although unfortunate, anticipation of the stabbing was "blowing
   the incident all out of proportion."

   "This Saturday will mark my sixth arrest, or possibly seventh. I can't
   tell the future," Jones said, shaking his head in apparent anger. "Yet
   I won't get charged this time, either. They'll just be persecuting me
   for the stabbing that's going to happen because of the other stuff
   that already happened. Is that fair? I don't think that when Mr. Smart
   Mouth Darrent Wilson gets stabbed it should affect my career like
   that."

   "You know that Darrent, the guy who's going to get tragically stabbed,
   has always had it in for me," Jones added. "By the time he gets put in
   the hospital or killed, he will have thrown me out of his club at
   least twice, and there's two days between now and the stabbing. I
   think he's going to use getting cut up as an excuse to get at my
   money, is what I think."

   Manny Arora, Jones' attorney, said that Jones was "genuinely sorry in
   advance" about the incident, but was not at liberty to answer
   questions regarding his relationship with the one to three men who
   will be seen fleeing the vicinity covered in blood. Jones refused to
   confirm that the weapon to be used in the stabbing, a seven-inch
   pearl-handled hunting knife, will in fact be given to one of the men
   by Jones himself this coming Friday morning.

   NFL commissioner Roger Goodell has already scheduled a rare Sunday
   meeting with Jones, demanding Jones be in his office as soon as news
   of the incident becomes public.

