
   BROOKLYN, NY--Nearly 50 percent of 26-year-old paralegal Philip
   Jenkins' encoded long-term memories involve button combinations,
   game-playing experiences, and spatial-cognitive maps of various levels
   and worlds from Nintendo's line of video-game consoles, a team of
   neuroscientists reported Tuesday.

   The memory-evaluation study, headed by Dr. Franklin McCarroll of New
   York University's School of Psychology, revealed that approximately 47
   percent of Jenkins' hippocampus is dedicated to storing notable
   video-game victories and frustrating last-minute defeats, while 32
   percent of his amygdala contains embedded neurological scripts
   pertaining to game strategies, character back stories, theme songs,
   and cheat codes. In addition, his entire dorsolateral prefrontal
   cortex is devoted to remembering the time he did a helicopter dunk
   from half-court with Shawn Kemp at the buzzer to beat the Charlotte
   Hornets 82-81 in NBA Jam: Tournament Edition.
   [4]Enlarge Image Nintendo 

   Jenkins makes room for new Wii tennis-based memories by eradicating
   moments from his high school graduation and a 1994 trip to a local
   aquarium.

   Although these percentages are only slightly above the average for
   males in Jenkins' age bracket, McCarroll said that the memories most
   closely associated with the interactive gaming systems can be accessed
   far more quickly than any of his memories involving school, work, or
   family.

   "It takes Mr. Jenkins 4.33 milliseconds to retrieve the memory of
   holding his newborn sister for the first time, but just 1.09
   milliseconds to retrieve the memory of knocking Pikachu off the Sector
   Z platform with Donkey Kong's 'ground pound' maneuver in Super Smash
   Bros.," McCarroll said. "In fact, the only school-related memory he is
   able to review as vividly as the underwater-bomb-defusing level of
   Nintendo Entertainment System's Teenage Mutant Ninja Turtles is his
   first day of college, which was spent playing multiplayer GoldenEye
   007 with his roommates."

   According to an fMRI of Jenkins' brain regions during the process of
   memory recall, his parietal lobe registers the same amount of activity
   when he hears the word "mother" as it does when he hears the words
   "Banjo Kazooie."

   "Due to sheer repetition in his peak synaptic years for processing new
   information, every neural strand in Philip's basal ganglia is embedded
   with the Konami Code: up, up, down, down, left, right, left, right, B,
   A, select, start," McCarroll said.

   Nintendo-based memories are also among Jenkins' most frequently
   retrieved, researcher Dr. Francis Holbrook said. A series of recent
   tests suggest that when Jenkins accesses stored information in
   response to visual or mental cues, he is most likely to remember his
   family's trip to Disney World, followed by the time he beat the
   dreaded Stage 57 on Bubble Bobble without losing a life, the first
   time he rode a bike, the exact route he made Bo Jackson run to defeat
   his friend Jason Whitner at Tecmo Bowl, hiding underneath his covers
   while his parents fought noisily in the adjoining room, and the
   locations of the three warp whistles in Super Mario Bros. 3.

   "On Friday, we showed Mr. Jenkins a series of images meant to elicit
   memories of times of great pain and confusion in his life," Holbrook
   said. "The first two events that came to the fore of his psyche were
   an incident in late 2000 when the screen froze just as he was about to
   set a new 'best lap' record on Wave Race 64, and his
   great-grandmother's funeral."

   Holbrook also suggested that as much as 17 percent of Jenkins'
   cerebellum capacity may be filled with motor-coordination skills of
   the various Nintendo system controllers, including the Power Glove,
   the Power Pad mat, and the special joystick issued by Capcom for the
   Super NES edition of Street Fighter II.

   Some researchers have theorized that the amount of space Jenkins'
   brain allocates for Nintendo-based memories has resulted in damage to
   or the complete loss of his non-Nintendo-based memories. They note
   that although Jenkins cannot remember his father's cell phone number
   (415-547-6823) off the top of his head, he can recite without
   hesitation the password that allows you to view the credits in Mike
   Tyson's Punch-Out!! (106-113-0120).

   In a parallel study, a team of Columbia University behavioral
   psychologists suggested that Nintendo-related feats and
   accomplishments also account for approximately 75 percent of Jenkins'
   self-esteem.

   "Unsurprisingly, Mr. Jenkins' self-perception draws from the most
   important moments in his life, and is framed largely by the time he
   hit a game-winning grand slam with Saul in NES's Little League
   Baseball to help the New York team win the tournament," Dr. Gary
   Nordstrom said. "It is not uncommon for men his age to measure
   themselves by their greatest athletic achievements, and this is
   without a doubt Mr. Jenkins'."

   The findings also revealed that about 60 percent of Jenkins' repressed
   memories may involve Nintendo. In a Rorschach inkblot test
   administered to him, Jenkins compared a series of amorphous shapes to
   a bird eating its young, his mother brandishing a broadsword, and the
   entire cast of characters from Castlevania II: Simon's Quest.

