
   Dozens of eyewitness reports indicated that former vice president Al
   Gore deliberately attempted to raise the earth's temperature in order
   to boost box office receipts for An Inconvenient Truth, his
   documentary film about global warming that was released in May.
   [4]Enlarge Image Al Gore R 

   DESPERATE MEASURES
   Former vice president Al Gore takes a flamethrower to the Ross Ice
   Shelf in Antarctica to boost weekend ticket sales for An Inconvenient
   Truth.

   "We have accounts from concerned citizens that Mr. Gore purchased a
   Cadillac Escalade SUV several months before [his film] opened in
   theaters," said Kimberly Blume, spokeswoman for the California-based
   environmental group Friends Of The Earth. "Not only did Mr. Gore use
   his new gas-guzzler to make short trips to the grocery store, he also
   left the vehicle running 24 hours a day in the driveway of his
   Tennessee home with the air-conditioning on full-blast."

   In the weeks following the film's release, witnesses reported
   additional sightings of Gore engaging in activities such as
   discharging can after can of 1980s-era, CFC-laden aerosol into the
   air, and single-handedly clear-cutting over 6,000 acres of Amazon rain
   forest.

   Gore is also rumored to have set a four-acre tire fire outside Akron,
   OH, and ordered his Secret Service detail to shoot on sight anyone who
   attempts to put it out.

   "It's sad to see a man we thought was a passionate defender of the
   environment despoiling it for his own monetary gain," Blume said.

   Blume said that she and many environmentalists had momentarily
   expressed relief in late November when Gore appeared to cease his
   months-long practice of dismantling old refrigerators in order to
   release ozone-destroying freon into the atmosphere. Blume soon
   learned, however, that Gore had resumed the activity in Antarctica,
   where the earth's ozone layer is most fragile.

   Environmental groups have called for the federal government to step in
   and put a stop to Gore's actions, but officials say they do not have
   the power to stop him.

   "There is no legal recourse anyone can take against the former vice
   president," Environmental Protection Agency Administrator Stephen L.
   Johnson said. "Mr. Gore is well within the emissions standards set by
   the current administration."

   By year's end, Gore failed to slow his assault on the planet's
   delicately balanced climate systems. Satellite surveillance revealed
   what many believe to be a snowshoed Gore jumping up and down on an ice
   shelf in Greenland, chainsawing glaciers in the Alaskan wild, and
   urinating in the Gulf Stream waters off the coast of Newfoundland.

