
   NEW YORK--Director Martin Scorsese, long praised as one of the
   greatest modern American filmmakers for his works Taxi Driver, Raging
   Bull, The Last Temptation Of Christ, and Goodfellas, is following up
   his recent string of critically acclaimed triumphs with The Entitled,
   a three-hour, unabashed plea for a Best Director Oscar that opens
   nationwide Friday.

   Scorsese has lost to almost every major American filmmaker in his
   career, including actor-director Kevin Costner, who went on to create
   Waterworld and The Postman.
   [4]Enlarge Image The Entitled 

   Scorsese also designed the poster for his latest Oscar effort.

   "I've been making pictures for 40 years," said the intense,
   fast-talking Scorsese in an excerpt from The Entitled, during which
   the Rolling Stones' "Gimme Shelter" can be heard in the background.
   "For 40 years, I've been making pictures. And I've always been
   fascinated with the struggles a man must endure when people don't
   appreciate him. People say I'm the best. I didn't say it, they did. I
   just do my work. But for years they've been talking and you know it.
   You do. I deserve that award, is all I'm saying."

   The film, produced, directed, and independently released by the
   five-time Academy Award nominee, is a bold departure from his
   signature style of rapid editing, kinetic camera movement, and
   intricately choreographed tracking shots, instead employing only a
   single camera on a stationary tripod, with virtually no editing
   besides brief opening and closing credits. Captivating narratives of
   moral decay and violent machismo were notably absent, as Scorsese
   focused on a a simple message of redemption and gratification he hoped
   would be "real easy for everyone to understand."

   "For years I did the little pictures about the types of people I grew
   up with," said a passionately gesturing Scorsese in another Entitled
   scene. "Then I did the prestige-y, historical stuff like Last
   Temptation and The Age Of Innocence because I related to the
   characters, you know, outsiders in repressive environments making
   fateful choices. Then I started making the big sweeping epics, like
   Kundun and The Aviator. I've made comedies and documentaries, even
   concert films. Ever heard of The Last Waltz? No? Okay. You should."

   Continued Scorsese, "What happens? Nothing. Nothing for the versatile
   visionary who lives and breathes pictures."
     Martin Scorsese

   "People say I'm the best. I didn't say it, they did. And you know it."
   Director Martin Scorsese

   Scorsese goes on to describe in meticulous detail individual scenes
   "that alone should have won the Oscar," including Travis Bickle posing
   with his guns in front of a mirror in Taxi Driver, the close-up of
   coffee cups at the Debonair Social Club in Raging Bull, and the
   pool-hall fight scene in Mean Streets. "Remember my scene in the back
   of the cab in Taxi Driver?" Scorsese said. "That was me. I was that
   guy. That was me. Everyone remembers that."

   "You already should have done right by me with Gangs Of New York," he
   said. "I handed you guys that one on a silver platter."

   Although Scorsese does away with his traditional ensemble cast in The
   Entitled, several of his past associates make brief appearances,
   including director and screenwriter Paul Schrader, friend and
   collaborator Jay Cocks, and film editor Thelma Schoonmaker.

   "There's Paul," said Scorsese as Schrader briefly tilted his head into
   the frame and waved. "He has his own directorial career and he still
   says I should get an Oscar. He should, too. None of us are above
   wanting a little recognition. We're not stuck up."

   "You want feel-good and heartwarming, right?" Scorsese said. "I can do
   that. Or I can do casual violence with no strings attached. You know I
   can. What else you want? Kung-fu wire-work? Mentally disabled guy?
   Boring Robert Redford-style fishing movie? Just tell me what to do,
   I'll do it. Done. End of story. Give me my Oscar and I'm out of here.
   Poof."

   Newsweek movie critic David Ansen called The Entitled Scorsese's "best
   shot" at a directing Oscar since his most recent loss to Clint
   Eastwood for Million Dollar Baby. "Filming in a soundstage in Burbank
   instead of on the streets of New York was a risk, but it will pay
   off," Ansen said. "As long as Spielberg doesn't come out with
   anything, I'd say this is Scorsese's year."

   Film-industry insiders said that The Entitled was already being talked
   about as the frontrunner for the Golden Globes, the Palme d'Or,
   Cannes, and Tribeca Film Festival honors, and an Oscar for Best
   Adapted Screenplay.

