
   MANCHESTER, NH--Rumors are swirling among Beltway insiders that the
   Patterson family vacation last weekend to New Hampshire, site of the
   first presidential primary, was, in fact, an attempt by the Michigan
   family of four to test the waters for a 2008 presidential run.
   [4]Enlarge Image Paterson Family 

   The Patterson family impresses locals with their "charm and dignity."

   The Pattersons reportedly spent most of their three-day stay in the
   Granite State--known for its ability to make or break a
   candidate--interacting with locals, visiting key landmarks, and,
   according to political observers, using the outing to showcase their
   message of strong family values. They were seen taking a guided tour
   of a maple-sugar house in Barrington as well as stopping for countless
   photo opportunities outside government buildings in Concord and at
   other sites around the state.

   "No one knew they were planning to throw their hat in the ring,"
   Boston Globe columnist Scott Lehigh said. "They've obviously been
   planning this trip for months, maybe even as long as a year. They
   managed to squeeze countless side trips into an almost impossibly
   tight schedule, including a skiing outing at Pats Peak to their stop
   and a stop at the Hannah Duston monument in Penacook."

   Pundits said the family's slow drive through Bear Brook State Park
   signaled a deep concern for environmental issues, while their decision
   to attend Sunday services at the New Castle Congregational Church
   acted as a nod to the country's important bloc of religious voters.
   The Pattersons also strolled the shopping districts of wealthy
   Portsmouth, showing their ability to relate to a cross-section of
   Americans.
   [5]Enlarge Image Paterson Family 

   The Patterson family visits the Nutfield Brewery in Derry, NH

   "They looked very presidential," Lehigh said.

   Phil Patterson, appearing relaxed but dignified in a black jacket,
   gray slacks, and open-collar white shirt, made sure to carry the items
   he purchased from a local Nashua antiquary himself, smiling broadly
   during several trips back and forth to his minivan. When asked by
   locals why the family was in town, Patterson downplayed the visit,
   saying that he was just introducing his children to the "great state
   of New Hampshire."

   "A lot of nice folks around here," Janice Patterson said, shaking
   hands with Beefside Family Restaurant owner Jim Day after a meal the
   family called "really good." According to Day, they left a very
   generous tip and told him their waitress "couldn't have been
   friendlier."

   "They were just really down to earth," Day said.

   Despite the growing buzz about their candidacy, some, such as CNN
   political analyst Bill Schneider, say the family's lack of political
   experience is a setback. Phil, 49, is a pediatrician; Janice, 47, a
   homemaker, graduated from the University of Connecticut with a history
   degree; and Wesley, 19, and Phil Jr., 17, have been widely criticized
   for their youth. Likewise, the family has yet to form an exploratory
   committee, and, almost all observers agree that, with a combined
   annual income of less than $70,000, they are already at a serious
   fund-raising disadvantage. They were also roundly chided by the media
   after a major misstep in which Phil Jr. referred to the historic
   Shaker Village in Canterbury as "sucky."

   "The Pattersons have an uphill climb, that's for sure," said political
   analyst George Stephanopoulos on his ABC program This Week. "But this
   New Hampshire trip vaults them onto the national stage, sending the
   message that they are serious about '08. All that's left now is the
   paperwork."

   "Honestly, who in their right mind would visit the Audubon Society of
   New Hampshire if they weren't running for office?" he added.

   Experts are already debating how the Pattersons stack up against early
   front-runners John McCain, Barack Obama, and Hillary Clinton. All
   agree that it will depend on how New Hampshirites respond to their
   visit.

   "The Pattersons are masterful at crafting the image of the everyday
   middle-class family," Washington Post reporter Dan Balz said. "They
   are likeable, and that will often resonate with voters more than
   experience."

   Added Balz: "But the American people should start asking themselves
   what a Patterson family presidency would mean for this country."

   Sources close to the family say the family will soon visit Janice
   Patterson's aging mother in Iowa--home to the first-in-the-nation
   presidential caucus--where many are predicting the family will
   formally announce their candidacy.

   "She's very ill," Mrs. Patterson said of her mother and the carefully
   planned trip. "I don't think she'll be with us much longer."

