
   SIOUX FALLS, SD--Managers of an area International House of Pancakes
   discovered 95 comment cards nailed to its front door Sunday, which
   were later identified as the work of local resident Ronald Lyman, a
   53-year-old contractor and onetime regular customer who is calling for
   wide-scale reform of the venerable chain.
   [4]Enlarge Image Modern Day Martin Luther 

   The self-styled pancake reformer decries IHOP indulgences such as
   whipped toppings.

   "IHOP has grown weak on powdered sugar and fruity garnishes, forsaking
   the righteousness of its original rib-sticking mission," said Lyman,
   who nailed his 95 comments to the door shortly before the morning
   brunch rush, when they would receive maximum exposure. "This house is
   no longer a house of pancakes--it is a house of lies."

   Lyman's 95 cards assail IHOP for what he perceives to be an "unholy
   alliance" of the sweet and the savory, a dangerously narrowing
   blueberry-to-batter ratio, hard-to-open butter packets, and an
   increasingly tall short stack. Fifteen cards alone attack the
   excessive breadth of syrup selection.

   "IHOP is about pancakes, not syrups," card 41 reads. "No pancake can
   exist drowned in a pool of lingonberry. No man who comes hungry can
   leave happy on artificial orange-flavored goo."

   Lyman said that his pancake fundamentalism is based on "the trinity of
   griddle-fried batter, butter, and maple syrup, as directed by our
   breakfast elders more than two score years ago." His beliefs were
   forged by years of increasing dissatisfaction with the
   "internationalist" influence within IHOP, which he said stresses
   flavor over substance.
     Modern Day IHOP Logo

   "The course of my life changed last week when a waitress dropped a
   tray and I was struck with hot coffee," Lyman said. "As I wiped my
   eyes and opened them, suddenly I became aware of the full extent of
   the corruption. Sweet crepes mingling with egg runoff. The sickening
   decadence of Belgian waffles. A waitstaff more concerned with lining
   their pockets with tips than with dedicating their lives to service. I
   stormed from the wicked place without settling my bill, finally
   realizing what I must do: devote my life to bringing down the House of
   Pancakes. To bring it down, then build it anew in righteousness and
   customer satisfaction."

   IHOP manager Dennis Ryskowski said that he has tried to read some of
   Lyman's comments during his breaks, but has so far only made it to
   card 26, "On the Blankets of Pigs."

   "We welcome all customer suggestions and feedback," Ryskowski said.
   "That's why we provide the comment cards. I do, however, wish Mr.
   Lyman had simply placed his in the box by the host station instead."

   Several customers who had come to the restaurant after bars closed
   Sunday night agreed with Lyman's stand, saying they, too, often feel
   disconnected from the IHOP experience.

   "I really like what he has to say about returning to the basics,"
   customer Kelly Grabler said. "Sometimes you just want a nice fat stack
   of pancakes, but you end up overwhelmed by the choices. Lots of the
   stuff isn't even breakfast. An IHOP meal should be a straightforward
   relationship between an individual and some pancakes."

   Card 63 perhaps most eloquently summarizes Lyman's condemnatory
   stance.

   "These steep and serene blue roofs, which arc to the heavens, in truth
   house corrupt souls who once sought succor in a simple pancake, but
   have now succumbed to the temptation of caramel cheesecakes and Caesar
   salads," Lyman wrote. "Only by returning to its hearty breakfast roots
   can IHOP save itself and its customers."

   Lyman suggested that, should his recommended changes not be
   instituted, he will have no choice but to break with the restaurant
   and start his own International House of Pancakes, Reformed (IHOPR)
   off I-229 by the airport.

