
   DEL MAR, CA-Despite strong personal reservations, Republican
   presidential contender George W. Bush confirmed Monday that he has
   "reluctantly" agreed to accept a $2 million donation from his parents
   "to help with some of the mounting expenses involved in running for
   office."

   [4]Enlarge Image Bush Reluctantly Accepts 

   Presidential hopeful George W. Bush is flanked by his mom and dad, who
   holds a check for him.

   "I didn't want to do it, as I have always prided myself on paying my
   own way," Bush told reporters during a campaign stop near San Diego.
   "Unfortunately, the increasing difficulty of competing with the Gore
   campaign's unlimited taxpayer war chest has forced me to accept some
   limited financial support."

   According to Bush 2000 spokesman Geoff Bahnsen, Bush has agreed to a
   one-time loan in the form of a check for $2 million, to help cover
   some of his travel and grocery expenses between now and November.
   Bahnsen stressed that the candidate will pay his parents back the full
   amount, plus interest, "just as soon as he gets back on his feet
   financially."

   Bush's acceptance of money from his parents to help defray campaign
   costs is said to be a severe blow to his pride. Since announcing his
   candidacy, the Texas governor has made a point of refusing all
   financial help from his well-to-do parents and their various friends
   and business associates.

   "For a self-made man like George W. to lower himself to accepting
   money from his family must have been very hard," said Kate O'Beirne,
   Washington editor for The National Review. "Here is a man who loathes
   the notion of privilege. However, this was a case where he had to be
   man enough to admit that he needed a little help. And, luckily, his
   parents were able to spare the $2 million."

   Throughout the race, Bush has paid for all his expenses out of pocket,
   supplementing his income with various "odd jobs" while on the campaign
   trail. Such self-sufficiency and insistence on personal fiscal
   responsibility is nothing new for the presidential hopeful.

   "Bootstrap" Bush, as he was affectionately known at Yale, first gained
   notoriety for his discipline and thrift while at the Ivy League
   school, paying his own way through by working as a prep cook at a New
   Haven-area diner. Several years later, after having donated his
   six-figure trust fund to charity, Bush won a low-income scholarship to
   Harvard Business School. He refused the money, however, insisting at
   the time that "working my way through school by doing night janitorial
   work is the best way for me to build character and learn the value of
   a dollar."

   In 1989, when his father and various business associates decided that
   the young George W. might want to try his hand at running a
   major-league baseball team, the younger Bush refused outside
   assistance, working a second job at a local convenience store for an
   entire summer to save up the $137 million he needed to buy the Texas
   Rangers.

   Similarly, he has steadfastly refused his father's offers to share in
   his oil holdings over the years, opting instead to prospect new sites
   and dig the oil wells himself.

   "By showing a little old-fashioned, Texas-style gumption and hard
   work, George W. has become a major oil baron in his own right,"
   Washington Post reporter Hanna Rosin said. "Sure, it would have been
   easier for him to ride his father's coattails to success, but that's
   not his way. George W. Bush is a proud man who doesn't believe in
   exploiting the considerable advantages with which he was born."

   For his part, Bush maintained that his decision to accept money from
   his mother and father is a one-time emergency measure.

     Bush Reluctantly Accepts jump

   The donation and the card in which it arrived.

   "I didn't become governor of Texas by using my family's wealth, power,
   and connections. I did it through hard work-selling Grit door-to-door,
   holding garage and yard sales, mowing lawns in the summertime, and
   raking leaves in the fall to get the money I needed to fund my
   campaign," Bush said at a car-wash fundraiser.

   "My family raised me right, teaching me that a little elbow grease and
   some perseverance are all I need to make my dreams come true,"
   continued Bush, pausing briefly to hose the suds off a 1992 Chevy
   Lumina. "Just because Dad helped me out with an extra $2 million
   doesn't mean I'm going to be living the high life on somebody else's
   dime."

   Members of Bush's campaign staff agreed.

   "You can bet you'll see him out there on the streets tomorrow morning
   as usual, broom in hand, sweeping off storefronts for $3 apiece, just
   like he always does," said Rev. Buford H. Lee, a retired Baptist
   minister and volunteer Bush 2000 campaign manager. "That's a man who,
   even when he hardly has enough fuel in his private jet to make a
   weekend campaign stop in Ohio, still finds it in his heart to take
   what little jet fuel he does have and give half of it to the Widow
   Sanderson down the way."

   The elder Bush echoed his son's down-to-earth approach.

   "There's no shame in accepting charity if, like my son, you are truly
   in need of securing victory in a presidential election," the former
   president said. "After all, we're all human beings, and we all need
   help sometimes."

   "But charity can only go so far," Bush continued. "My daddy taught me,
   as I in turn have taught my son, to always believe in starting your
   own motor. A man's got to get out there and pound the pavement if he
   expects to earn a decent, honest living and put food on the table for
   his family. That's just the Bush way."

