   Jessica Simpson

   DALLAS--Speaking to reporters she had invited into her impenetrable
   subterranean Texas lair on Monday, Jessica Simpson gloated over the
   victory she recently achieved after nearly two years of using her
   personal charms, her unique brand of cunning, and every resource at
   her disposal to meticulously plot the downfall of the Cowboys' 2007
   season.

   "Ever since I was a little girl growing up in football-obsessed Texas,
   it's been a dream of mine to completely bring the evil, arrogant
   Cowboys organization and its boorish and cocky fans to their knees.
   But the suave and sophisticated players on that team are
   nigh-unapproachable for a nice country girl like me," Simpson declared
   from her Throne of Thorns, situated in the surveillance room of her
   headquarters. "And then I saw Tony. Instantly I knew that he was the
   weak link, the keystone, the only one for me to exploit."

   According to Simpson, her meticulously crafted plan hinged on
   capturing Romo's interest, artificially inflating his confidence, and
   allowing the Cowboys to gain success early in the season in order to
   create an atmosphere of swaggering arrogance among the team. Then,
   Simpson moved to Phase Beta, playfully distracting them with her
   ubiquitous, flirtatious presence games by waving, cheering, and
   attracting media attention. In addition, Simpson spent months
   analyzing quarterback efficiency, completion rates, and blocking
   stats, as well as dissecting the tendencies of defenses on second and
   third downs, and bending over to convince Romo to try out one of her
   audible calls.

   "He's such a kind and honest man," Simpson added. "Such Midwestern
   earnestness, such gullibility. You couldn't ask for someone dopier to
   manipulate in order to overthrow this so-called 'America's team.'"

   In addition to personally planning each phase of the diabolical plan,
   Simpson invested vast amounts of money into developing a highly
   volatile perfume formulated specifically to confuse and dazzle Romo.
   Created by skilled histological techno-artisans to magnify Simpson's
   natural pheromones, the quasi-hypnotic scent consisted of citrus
   blossoms, rose petals, and a complex combination of beetle secretions
   and the musk glands of Key deer. Simpson estimated the scent reduced
   Romo's I.Q. by as much as 40 points.

   "A few dabs placed on the nape of my neck and Tony's concentration
   melted when I leaned towards him," the multi-platinum recording artist
   said. "As a side effect, the soporific effects of the fragrance often
   forced him to hang on to the ball too long or throw into coverage
   instead of tossing the ball out of bounds."

   Simpson's long-sought opportunity to ruin the Cowboys attempt to
   return to the Super Bowl arose on Oct. 26, 2006 when, watching the
   monitors in the control center of her underground compound, she
   observed unwitting backup quarterback Tony Romo replace the injured
   Drew Bledsoe. Although Simpson said her ambitious scheme was merely in
   its embryonic stage at that point, she stated that when she saw Romo's
   first pass attempt was intercepted, his fate as the pop starlet's
   hapless pawn was sealed.

   Simpson immediately assembled a psychological profile of Romo to
   discover his desires, fears, and favorite color in order to expose him
   on the gridiron. Enlisting the services of paparazzi, Simpson offered
   to tip off the photographers in exchange for them sending reporter
   colleagues to Romo's hometown of Burlington, WI in order to gather
   critical information from his friends and neighbors.

   "No one could stand in my way," Simpson said. "His biggest fans were
   tricked into thinking the reporters wanted to write an article about
   what it was like for Tony to grow up in Burlington. Little did they
   know that I was obtaining knowledge key to eroding his completion
   rate."

   "The hardest thing was restraining myself since I could have made him
   melt down a few weeks into the season," Simpson added, claiming that
   it required a great deal of discipline to stop herself from giving
   Romo too much pumpkin pie when he spent Thanksgiving with her family.
   "But I knew if I really wanted to hurt the team and its stupid,
   slavish fans, I would have to let them get as close as possible and
   then snatch it away. So I let them make the playoffs."

   Although the final phase of Simpson's complex scheme occurred at her
   remote fortress in Cabo San Lucas, Mexico during the Cowboys' playoff
   bye week, the full impact of the plan would not be felt until Simpson
   called Romo at that week's practice every five minutes to apologize
   for jinxing him. Simpson, who asked the team's secretary to announce
   her phone calls over the PA system at the Cowboys facilities, credited
   the move for baffling the team into dropped passes and penalties at
   critical moments in the division playoff game.

   Simpson added that if she has some free time while recording her new
   country album, she would love the chance to ruin the Pro Bowl for the
   12 Cowboys selected.

