
   WASHINGTON--After decades spent battling gender discrimination and
   inequality in the workplace, the feminist movement underwent a
   high-level shake-up last month, when 53-year-old management consultant
   Peter "Buck" McGowan took over as new chief of the worldwide
   initiative for women's rights.
   [4]Enlarge Image McGowan 

   Head feminist "Buck" McGowan leads a march on Washington for women's
   rights.

   McGowan, who now oversees the group's day-to-day operations, said he
   "couldn't be happier" to bring his ambition, experience, and
   no-nonsense attitude to his new role as the nation's top feminist.

   "All the feminist movement needed to do was bring on someone who had
   the balls to do something about this glass ceiling business," said
   McGowan, who quickly closed the 23.5 percent gender wage gap by
   "making a few calls to the big boys upstairs." "In the world of gender
   identity and empowered female sexuality, it's all about who you know."

   McGowan, who was selected from a pool of roughly 150 million
   candidates, made eliminating sexual harassment his first priority
   before working on securing reproductive rights for women in all 50
   states, and promoting healthy body images through an influx of strong,
   independent female characters in TV, magazines, and film.

   "It's about time," McGowan said upon returning from a golf game with
   several "network honchos" in which he brokered a deal to bring a
   variety of women's sports to prime-time television. "These ladies
   should have brought me on years ago."

   McGowan claimed that one of the main reasons the movement enjoyed so
   little success in the past was that the previous management was often
   too timid and passive and should have been much more results-focused.

   "You can't waste time pussyfooting around with protests and getting
   all emotional about a bunch of irrelevant details," McGowan said. "If
   you want to enjoy equal rights, you have to have a real man-to-man
   chat with the people in charge until you can hammer out some more
   equitable custody laws."

   "And don't get me started on how disorganized and scatterbrained their
   old fundraising methods were," McGowan added. "Let's just say the
   movement never really had a head for numbers."

   After McGowan successfully appointed three of his best men to lead
   Smith College's women's studies department and called in some favors
   to a number of powerful board chairmen to triple the number of female
   CEOs in Fortune 500 companies, analysts predicted that the feminist
   movement could achieve all of McGowan's goals by as early as 2009.

   "With a charismatic, self-assured guy like Pete pulling the strings,
   we might even see a female elected president one of these days," said
   Nathan Roth, an analyst at the Cato Institute. "Finally, the feminist
   movement has a face that commands respect."

   McGowan, however, said he didn't get into the business of women's
   rights for the praise.

   "What these women were able to accomplish with the little manpower
   they had is very impressive," McGowan said. "I just bring a certain
   something to the table--I'm not sure what--that gave us that extra
   little push into complete female independence. I guess it just comes
   naturally."

   But despite his modesty, McGowan continues to garner praise from those
   closest to the cause.

   "The whole movement just seems more legitimate with Buck in charge,"
   leading feminist Gloria Steinem said at a gala dinner Friday. "His
   drive, focus, and determination are truly remarkable. Mr. McGowan is a
   man with a plan."

   Although he has not hinted at any future projects after all forms of
   gender discrimination are a thing of the past, McGowan has vehemently
   denied rumors that he will leave the feminist movement to head up the
   struggle for gay rights.

   "The wife would kill me if I took on any more hours," McGowan said.
   "I'm sure those fellows know how that goes."

