
   ROCKLAND, DE--Local resident Heather Telford's entire Friday was
   ruined by a set of uncooperative bangs that refused to set correctly,
   the 26-year-old benefits coordinator told reporters.
   [4]Enlarge Image Area Woman 

   "Why me? Why today?" Telford asked.

   According to Telford, the trouble began "right away" as she got ready
   for work, when she discovered that the three inches of
   forehead-skirting hair was unable to sit flat, despite the application
   of numerous gels, sprays, and pomades. A tuft on either side would not
   integrate with the central grouping, leaving three-quarter-inch gaps,
   while other wispy strands strayed from her temples, creating a highly
   undesirable "wing" effect. A last-ditch effort to wet and restyle the
   bangs only worsened their state, adding several more small kinks and
   increasing their overall dishevelment.

   "It was so awful," Telford said. "I should've just called in sick
   after I found out that my straightening iron was broken, because the
   whole day went downhill from there. I can't imagine a worse thing
   happening to me."

   The bangs went on to adversely affect every element of Telford's day,
   including her commute, her interactions with coworkers, the way food
   tasted, and even the sound of her voice.

   "I kept feeling these awful little wayward pieces brushing against my
   face, and I couldn't think about anything else," Telford said. "I
   could just sense people's eyes burning holes into my forehead as I
   passed by the water cooler. I can't blame them. I looked like a
   complete freak."
     Area Woman Timeline

   Telford spent most of her hour-long lunch break locked in her office,
   trying unsuccessfully to pin back the bangs with a barrette she found
   in her desk drawer.

   In the early afternoon, she was forced to present a new
   employee-wellness initiative at a meeting with company executives that
   she was unable to cancel.

   Telford said her bosses were polite throughout her presentation, but
   were also "clearly trying not to burst out laughing" at her bangs.

   "I'm not surprised they passed on the proposal--I just can't believe
   they didn't fire me on the spot," said Telford, who delivered her
   entire presentation while compulsively smoothing down the left portion
   of her bangs.

   "How could they take me seriously with the state my hair was in?"
   Telford said. "Months of work down the drain all because my stupid,
   stupid bangs are so stupid."

   The bangs, which Telford acquired five years ago in an attempt to
   frame her face and convince her ex-boyfriend he had made a big mistake
   by leaving her, have ruined an estimated 47 workdays, three vacations,
   and countless photos.

   Blaming her errant bangs on a combination of genetics and routinely
   "sleeping on them funny," Telford said that their fine, flyaway nature
   and penchant for being either too long or too short exceed even the
   two-inch-wide port-wine birthmark on her hip as her most bothersome
   physical shortcoming.

   "I'm about this close to cutting the damn things off myself, I swear
   to God," Telford said.

   Though she has considered transitioning to a less stressful hairstyle,
   she said the process of growing the bangs out would be "10,000 times
   worse."

   "I'd have to go through this awful period where they'd be at this odd,
   floppy length, and it would just suck," Telford said. "So I can either
   grow them out and look like a Yorkshire terrier, or keep them short
   and look like a mental patient. Those are my basic hair options right
   now."

   Following a "humiliating" but unavoidable visit to the supermarket,
   Telford's plans to return home, shower, and go to bed were foiled by a
   surprise birthday party organized by her roommates in her honor. The
   party, attended by Telford's close friends, parents, and people not
   seen since high school, included presents, lots of champagne drinking,
   and photos, and was the absolute worst conceivable thing that could
   have ever happened to her.

