
   TIPTON, IN--Wes Mendic, a grown man who works at a pool-supply store
   and lives all by himself, finds solace in a series of sad, piddling
   little activities when he is feeling down, he reported from his tiny
   one- bedroom apartment Tuesday.
   [4]Enlarge Image Area Man Sad Routine 

   Mendic added that, if his cheer-up routine fails to cheer him up by 8
   p.m., he vigorously masturbates to Internet pornography and falls
   asleep.

   "Whenever I'm down in the dumps, rather than wallow in my troubles, I
   try to do things that will get my mind off them," Mendic, 28, said.
   "Like, the first thing I always do is turn on all the lights in my
   apartment, even during the day. It just makes everything brighter."

   "It's amazing what something as small as lifting up your kitchen
   window, leaning your head out, and looking outside for a few minutes
   can do for your spirits," Mendic added.

   Mendic also indulges in a succession of "fun" tasks, including putting
   fresh, clean sheets and pillowcases on his bed; using his Dustbuster
   to thoroughly vacuum his two-by-three-foot welcome mat, the only
   section of carpeting he owns; and dumping out the contents of his coin
   bank, stacking the coins into small piles by denomination, and then
   placing them one by one back into the coin bank.

   "Something that always gives me a chuckle is going to my computer and
   loading up Bobby McFerrin's 'Don't Worry, Be Happy,'" said Mendic, who
   often watches the four-minute music-video clip several times in a row,
   staring intently at the screen and silently mouthing the lyrics in one
   of the saddest displays you will ever see. "It's funny, it's catchy,
   and it really helps remind you not to take this crazy business called
   life too seriously. I remember it used to cheer me up back when I was
   in college too. Good times."
   [5]Enlarge Image Area Man socks 

   Mendic seriously claims chores like sock-folding make him feel better
   because he's "accomplishing something."

   If his spirits are still low by lunchtime, Mendic said that he can
   always count on the simple task of preparing himself a tasty meal to
   help shake off the blues. His self-proclaimed "house specialty" is
   nachos.

   "I only make them a couple times a month as a treat, so they'll still
   seem special," said Mendic, arranging a layer of tortilla chips on a
   paper plate, then taking a Kraft single, carefully tearing it into sad
   little strips, and sprinkling it onto the chips as if it were shredded
   cheddar and not an individually wrapped slice of American cheese.
   "They taste real good, and only use up like one or two singles, so
   there's always enough for the next nacho time."

   When Mendic feels low, "comfort food" takes on new, asinine meaning,
   as virtually any kind of two-dimensional food, including toast,
   pancakes, or hamburgers, will inevitably find itself embossed with a
   jam, syrup, or mustard smiley face.

   Mendic also started a tradition called "mini-Thanksgiving," which he
   holds approximately once a month, and which consists of microwaved
   turkey medallions, canned cranberry sauce, and a paper plate.

   "It's great because it reminds me of spending time with friends and
   family," Mendic said.

   The pathetic rituals don't end there. During his afternoon shower--a
   second daily shower he takes to "relax and not have to focus on
   getting clean, like the morning shower"--Mendic reads the labels of
   his shampoo and conditioner out loud in a Don Pardo-esque voice, and
   even plays a pitiful little game in which he scans the bottle's
   instructions and ingredient write-ups for all 26 letters of the
   alphabet. And as he towels off and dresses, he dances around to the
   Paul Simon song "You Can Call Me Al," flailing his arms and shaking
   his legs with a mixture of genuine enthusiasm and lack of coordination
   that would make you want to cry.

   Despite his passion for bizarre little rituals that apparently keep
   him from tumbling into complete despair, over time Mendic has been
   forced to retire some of his habits, such as, for the love of Christ,
   playing Minesweeper.

   "While I played it, I'd pretend I was on a secret mission from the
   CIA," said Mendic, who would bob his head while clicking away on his
   mouse in a ridiculously intense manner. "It would always pump me up.
   Until one day, I beat Expert [level] in 108 seconds, and I knew I
   would never top that record, so it stopped being fun."

   Other heartbreakingly tragic routines Mendic cheers himself up with
   include fake- laughing, done in the hopes that it will trigger real,
   spontaneous laughter; throwing himself a "solo party"; poring over his
   high school yearbooks and rereading old e-mail exchanges from several
   years ago; calling his mother; sitting on his bed in front of the
   mirror and pretending he's interviewing himself about his life story;
   and checking his iPod's "date last played" column on iTunes and trying
   to remember where he would have been when he last heard each song.

