
   WASHINGTON, DC--In the latest in a long series of ominous public
   pronouncements, the Department of Evil released a statement Monday
   demanding that all residents of the United States must die.
   [4]Enlarge Image Department Of Evil 

   Dread Secretary of Evil Hammond S. Reynolds told reporters that they,
   too, must die.

   "Yes, all must die," Dread Secretary of Evil Hammond S. Reynolds said
   during a press conference in Room 1228 of Washington's Robert C.
   Weaver Federal Building. "There shall soon come an accounting in which
   all will fall before the Grim Reaper as wheat in winter, as lambs
   under the knife. Soon all necks will feel the steely bite of our soul-
   thirsting axe, wielded by the unforgiving iron hand of the Department
   of Evil. Thus spake I, Dread Secretary Reynolds."

   The dread secretary then took questions from the assembled reporters.

   Although the Department of Evil has not yet announced the exact
   timetable for the death of all, it recommends citizens make their
   peace with doomed relatives and spouses immediately, as the hour of
   their ending draws ever nigh and will be upon them as soon as the
   necessary funding has been authorized by the House Appropriations
   Committee.

   "This budget approval is merely a pitiful, niggling formality, for
   soon we'll be free to swarm across the land draining the life-pus out
   of all you quivering mortal worms," Reynolds said. "Doubt us not: Come
   the wintertide, you all shall die, and die you will. Sorry, I meant
   'must.' Die you must!"

   Originally established by an act of Congress in 1953 and granted
   broader powers and funding in 1986 under the second Reagan
   administration, the Department of Evil has been an occasional source
   of controversy. Its 1993 And The Streets Shall Run Red With The Blood
   Of The Innocent initiative was highly criticized at the time by
   moderates, who thought the department's agenda overly harsh.
   [5]Enlarge Image Department Of Evil Jump 

   An official from the Department of Evil described their 2007 strategic
   action plan at a conference in January.

   In 2004, an ambitious plan to seed the clouds with blood and then rain
   excruciation down upon the thrice-damned didn't even make it past a
   Senate budget committee, which criticized the plan as poorly
   conceived.

   And last year, the department received a stinging blow after Congress
   voted to allocate only one-third of the money requested to swell the
   ranks of its deranged, barbarous demon cavalry.

   Despite those recent setbacks, a DOE spokesbeast said that the dread
   secretary remains confident that his department will prevail in the
   end.

   To publicize their current mission, the Department of Evil distributed
   to media outlets a ring-bound portfolio titled "You Shall All Perish
   Screaming 2007," which provides estimates and logistics detailing how
   everyone will die, a line-by-line budget breakdown, and an addendum
   apologizing that the document was not printed in human blood. The full
   text is available at evil.gov.

   The "All Must Die" initiative, the highest-profile program proposed by
   the DOE in recent memory, came under almost immediate scrutiny from
   politicians on both sides of the aisle.

   "I don't understand why we still even have a Department of Evil," Sen.
   Sherrod Brown (D-OH) said. "It's a Cold War holdover, an artifact of
   the '50s that has outlived its usefulness. Mr. Reynolds has done as
   good a job as any recent dread secretary, but as afraid as I am of
   him, I believe his talents would be better served at Education or
   Agriculture."

   "Once again, Mr. Reynolds wants to throw money at the everyone-dies
   issue--in this case, $11.43 billion," Sen. Arlen Specter (R-PA) said.
   "This is a waste of taxpayer dollars to do work best left to the
   private sector. It's high time for the DOE to be absorbed into
   Homeland Security, where it belongs."

   At the press conference, Reynolds refused to disclose his reasons for
   proposing that all must die.

   "Question not the dread secretary, insects!" said Reynolds, rearing
   back his mighty head and bellowing as a powerful crescendo emanated
   from the department's enormous Gothic pipe organ. "First, the
   bandwagoners in Congress seek to derail our plans or committee them to
   death. Now, the mindless blood-bags who populate this teeming nation
   wish to know why they must perish. I will respond with the same answer
   we have always given: Despair, groveling vermin, and may your deaf,
   blind God forsake the United States of America! We're done here."

