   Navy football

   WASHINGTON, DC--As combined American forces celebrate two consecutive
   football wins against the Notre Dame Fighting Irish while
   simultaneously marking the loss of the 3,150th soldier to hostile
   action in Iraq, many are left wondering if the United States military
   is in fact focusing its energies on the correct opponent.

   "There is no doubt that Navy's recent 46-44 defeat of a motivated,
   entrenched Notre Dame team after a long drawn-out battle was a
   masterpiece of leadership, strategy, tactics, and bravery in the
   finest tradition of the service," said Grant Hughson, an editor at
   Jane's Sporting News. "And the total Air Force 41-24 domination of the
   Irish, accomplished by bringing to bear the sort of overwhelming force
   against which no opponent can retaliate, was a textbook execution of
   the doctrines of that particular branch of the American armed forces.
   Meanwhile, however, they seem to be making little or no headway in
   Iraq."

   As the troop surge in Iraq draws to a close, sectarian and insurgent
   activity seems to have slowed to a near-standstill. However, with the
   2007 death toll exceeding 850, more U.S. troops have been lost this
   year than in any other since major combat operations began, throwing
   the military's first victory over Notre Dame since 1963 into stark
   contrast.

   "Strange how history repeats itself," Navy historian and football
   commentator John Feinstein said after the Air Force victory was
   reported alongside the news that the U.S. was preparing to reduce
   their commitment in Iraq by at least one battalion. "I don't think
   anyone who saw it will deny that Roger Staubach's '63 victory over the
   Golden Domers was inspiring, but I'd bet any money that at the time
   the Pentagon would've traded it for a victory in Vietnam."

   Reactions to the armed forces' lopsided record of domestic and
   overseas success has been mixed, with many fans of the military
   pointing out that, while both football and war can be brutal, bloody,
   and final, the outcomes of combat may take decades to become clear.

   "It's important to realize that our young men have been fighting
   pitched battles against religious fanatics who have been brainwashed
   into a culture that seeks to destroy all other ways of life," Air
   Force head coach Troy Calhoun said Monday. "That's just the way Notre
   Dame football is, the way it's always been. You can't reason with
   people like that. You destroy them as completely, remorselessly, and
   quickly as you can."

   "Naturally, the young men of our service academy will find the
   situation infinitely more complex when they're deployed to Iraq," Navy
   head coach Paul Johnson added. "Compare football to war all you want,
   but unlike when you go into South Bend, winning in Baghdad means
   winning the hearts and minds of the people, not pursuing some sort of
   scorched-earth policy."

   Gen. David Petraeus, the top U.S. commander in Iraq and architect of
   the military's much-criticized current counterinsurgency strategy,
   offered no comment on whether or not the U.S. was any closer to
   following up its victories against Notre Dame with one or more
   much-needed victories in Iraq. However, the West Point graduate did
   express his disgust with the recent "friendly fire" incident in which
   the Air Force Falcons shelled the Army Black Knights 30-10 and voiced
   his support for installing some variation of the option in order to
   increase the Army's offensive capabilities.

