
   NEW YORK--Even in the air-conditioned confines of New York's John F.
   Kennedy Airport back on June 14, Abu Basir Yousef was sweating.
   [4]Enlarge Image Yousef 

   Terrorist Yousef waits in vain for his dirty bomb.

   His sole piece of luggage--a black duffel bag--was lost upon his
   arrival in New York.

   Despite hours of waiting, and several U.S. Airways check-in counter
   workers and Transportation Security Administration screeners joining
   in the search, the Yemen-born 32-year-old had yet to hear any positive
   updates. Finally, a baggage claim representative approached him.

   "Afraid I've got some bad news," the worker said to Yousef.

   Airline personnel had searched the plane, the tarmac, and the gate,
   but were still unable to locate his bag containing his homemade dirty
   bomb.

   "My trip was ruined," Yousef said. "But Allah will right this wrong."

   Most Americans have grown accustomed to inconvenience in the name of
   security, be it color-coded anxieties or metal detectors at public
   libraries. But al-Qaeda member Yousef lived a nightmare scenario that
   would cause even the most frequent of flyers to shudder.

   After a cramped, twice-delayed U.S. Airways flight that he said would
   be "the last of my life," Yousef sat and stared for hours at an empty,
   rotating baggage carousel at JFK, searching in vain for his expensive
   and fragile cargo, unaware that it was currently being routed and
   re-routed around the country.

   Over the next three days, it would arrive at virtually every major
   domestic destination--except for its intended one, New York--and
   eventually wind up among the Father's Day gifts and matching bags in
   Lambert-St. Louis International Airport.

   According to U.S. Airways, the luggage lingered in St. Louis after an
   unscheduled side trip to Dallas, a short stint in Charlotte, NC and
   even a surprise UPS delivery to a suburban home in Michigan.

   When informed that somebody had mistakenly taken his luggage home,
   opened it, and called the airline, who returned it--two days later--to
   Detroit's Metro Airport, Yousef could only shake his head.

   "The U.S. truly is the Great Satan," he said.

   His case is but one among thousands. In a busy summer season with
   multiple new security regulations, baggage blunders like this leave
   travelers like Yousef with no choice but to shrug and laugh at their
   all-too-common horror stories.

   But the sheer number of unintentional side-trips taken by this
   particular radioactive weapon forced U.S. Airways' Vice President For
   Consumer Affairs Bryce Fox to admit that "baggage mishandling history"
   may have been made.

   "We sincerely apologize to Mr. Yousef for sending his explosive device
   to St. Louis--eventually," Fox said, chuckling. "Had we paid a little
   more attention, we would have definitely known St. Louis was not this
   bomb's final destination. At least we can say that it was not damaged,
   or really even touched, by TSA staff."

   By the 22nd, over a week since Yousef discovered his bomb was missing,
   the duffel bag finally reached JFK. Yet even an attempt to contact him
   at his Bronx home about its arrival proved a comedy of errors. A
   mispronunciation of Yousef's name in the baggage claim office resulted
   in the bag being returned to another traveler in the airport that
   day--air marshal Abe Joseph.

   "I took one look inside and realized that somebody was probably pretty
   upset to be missing such a complicated piece of equipment," Joseph
   said. "I brought it to security, and they held me up for more than an
   hour with the thing, and when they finally passed it through, what did
   they do? They dropped it. Twice."

   Added Joseph: "Welcome to New York."

   It's hard to believe that one innocent-looking, dirty-bomb-holding
   black duffel bag could wreak so much havoc, an irony not lost on
   Yousef. "These infidels must die," he said.

   U.S. Airways spokeswoman Deborah Shier once again apologized to Yousef
   and said that the airline had returned his bag via private courier
   back to his Bronx apartment on Thursday. "We sincerely appreciate his
   business, and hope he will consider U.S. Airways for future flights,"
   Shier said. "I can assure him those flights will most likely go a lot
   smoother."

   Yousef may have his luggage back safe, but nevertheless refuses to do
   business again with U.S. Airways, saying that he has "another
   important mission" to attend to on the West Coast--one where his bomb
   will, no doubt, be better treated.

