
   WASHINGTON, DC--Democratic candidate John Kerry seems to truly believe
   he has a chance at winning the presidency in 2004, the adorable
   Massachusetts senator revealed Monday.

   [4]Enlarge Image Adorable Democratic Candidate 

   Kerry, looking very nice all dressed up.

   "The current administration's reckless approach to tax cuts is a huge
   fiscal gamble," said the plucky politician. "It benefits the wealthy,
   hurts the poor, and will never succeed in restoring broad-based
   economic growth and financial discipline."

   "We must act now, before our nation plunges deeper into debt," added
   Kerry, sounding as cute as ever. "When George Bush took office, there
   was a projected budget surplus of $5.6 trillion from 2002 to 2011.
   Now, economists project hundreds of billions of dollars in deficits
   for the same time period."

   The precocious Kerry is one of nine candidates in the race for the
   Democratic presidential nomination.

   "That is so great," said a beaming Dan Rather following a report on
   CBS Evening News. "Kerry says he will beat not only all the White
   House hopefuls in the primary, but also President Bush in the
   election. Keep it up, champ!"

   In spite of Bush's campaign war chest of more than $40 million, Kerry
   maintains a positive outlook.

   "Our country cannot afford to stand behind a president who cuts taxes
   in the face of huge military spending," Kerry said on NBC's Meet The
   Press Sunday. "We must choose a leader who is not afraid to make
   economic decisions that make us stronger in the future, not just the
   ones he thinks will keep him in office."

   "Yes, sir, 'Mr. President,'" bemused interviewer Tim Russert said.
   "Whatever you say."

   Kerry has campaigned tirelessly since announcing earlier this year
   that he wanted to run for president.

   "I believe it's time to turn this country around," Kerry said at a
   campaign stop in Davenport, IA. "On virtually every issue, the
   president has moved America in the wrong direction: the budget busted,
   the economy down, the stock market down, unemployment up, the
   uninsured up, and an America increasingly isolated in the world."

   [5]Enlarge Image Adorable Democratic Candidate jump 

   House Majority Leader Tom DeLay (R-TX) congratulates Kerry for making
   a "super-duper point" about Iraq.

   "He looks so handsome," 68-year-old onlooker Iris Weum said. "It's so
   nice that he's trying to be president."

   Kerry, looking very presidential in his nice new suit and clean white
   shirt, also criticized Bush's strategy for the war in Iraq.

   "The truth is, the Bush Administration went to war without a plan to
   win the peace in Iraq," Kerry said. "Our troops should not be sent
   into battle like campaign props. We must demand more of our
   commander-in-chief."

   Though the road to the presidency is a long one, experts report Kerry
   is "doing a great job."

   "Kerry's presidential campaign had nearly $11 million in the bank at
   the end of June, which tops the field of Democratic hopefuls in terms
   of cash," said Candice Lowman, a political analyst with the
   conservative think tank American Enterprise Institute. "So, that's
   something. Heh heh. What a sweetie."

   Lowman added: "Well, you know, though, as the White House scrambles to
   answer questions about disputed intelligence on Iraq's nuclear-weapons
   programs, at least one of those Democratic candidates might have a
   shot. Stranger things have happened. Aw, who am I kidding?"

   While Kerry seeks to discredit Bush, he must also differentiate
   himself from the eight other campaigning Democrats. His main
   competition within the party comes from U.S. Sen. Joe Lieberman
   (D-CT), U.S. Rep. Richard Gephardt (D-MO), and Vermont Gov. Howard
   Dean, all of whom think they are going to win the election in 2004.

   "Go get 'em, tigers," said Toby Nichols, a top advisor to Bush's
   campaign in 2000. "Go be president, guys."

   Kerry shows no signs of slowing his cute campaign efforts.

   "It is long overdue that America stops being the only industrialized
   nation on this planet that doesn't have health care available for all
   of its citizens," Kerry said in a conference call with reporters. "I'm
   running for president to make health care for all Americans a right
   and not a privilege, to bring costs under control, and to cover the
   uninsured."

   "Awwww," said Adrian Tung, reporter for The Baltimore Sun. "That
   Kerry."

