
   NAGANO, JAPAN--Mere hours after eating what he claims to be his
   "farewell meal" Tuesday, longtime consumer of comestible goods Takeru
   Kobayashi formally announced that, after a career that has spanned
   nearly his entire lifetime, he has decided to walk away from eating
   food.
   [4]Enlarge Image Kobayashi 

   "My physical gifts, including my God-given ability to ingest food, are
   still there, but my passion for it is not," said a gaunt, visibly
   fatigued Kobayashi, speaking through his interpreter in a barely
   audible whisper. "Yes, chewing and swallowing food has always played
   an important part in my life, and if I'd never done it, I probably
   wouldn't be here today. But after nearly 30 years, I am tired of
   eating."

   "I used to eat because I wanted to, but lately it seems like I only do
   it because I feel like I have to," added Kobayashi, who claims that he
   was in the middle of eating his 52nd barbecue chicken wing last week
   when he realized he no longer possessed the same hunger he did earlier
   in his career. "I knew it was time to step aside and give others the
   chance to eat."

   The announcement has come as a shock to those close to the Japanese
   star, who claim that for Kobayashi, eating was more than just a
   hobby--that a powerful, mysterious force deep inside of him compelled
   him to eat. Many expected him to continue eating until the day he
   died.

   "Takeru used to live, breathe, and eat food," said Hideki Ihara,
   Kobayashi's uncle. "Not a day went by that he didn't eat. He based his
   whole day around it. He'd be down in the kitchen every morning at the
   crack of dawn, squeezing in an early meal. He'd be the last one at the
   dinner table each night. In fact, he loved it so much that he would
   leave his job in the middle of the day and spend his lunch hour eating
   food. Now that's dedication."

   "I don't know how he's going to survive without eating," Ihara added.

   According to Kobayashi, the transition from a life of eating to one of
   not eating has not been easy.

   "Do I still crave food? Of course--usually about three times per day,"
   Kobayashi said. "There are times when the thought of never eating
   again really hurts. There are times when it burns, times when it
   aches, times when it induces fainting, and times when my blood
   pressure suddenly drops and I experience heart palpitations for two
   straight minutes. Like any change in life, it's going to be an
   adjustment."

   Kobayashi also said that, because he was born into a family of
   lifelong food-eaters, he was afraid to explore other career paths
   throughout his life, believing that doing so might upset his parents.

   "I've been eating ever since I was in diapers," Kobayashi said. "My
   parents encouraged me to start eating at a very young age, although
   they sometimes forced me to eat things I did not want."

   "After 29 years, I'd like to try some new things, like kayaking,
   mountain climbing, or ingesting liquids," he added.

   Although Kobayashi's friends are happy for him, they have expressed
   concern for his well-being, claiming that he has appeared listless,
   depressed, and seems to be wasting away since his retirement. Some
   think that the decision to give up eating may even have long-term
   effects on Kobayashi's health.

   "Ever since he retired from eating, it's like part of him is gone,"
   Kobayashi's friend Tsuyoshi Hasegawa said. "Specifically, the part of
   the brain that regulates autonomic activities and heat sensitivity."

   Despite his family members pleading with him at his bedside to
   reconsider his decision, Kobayashi maintains that he "[does] not want
   to become one of those washed-up guys who doesn't know when to quit
   and ends up having to eat through a straw."

   "There are things about eating that I will miss--the sandwiches, the
   hard-boiled eggs, the satisfying feeling you get after replenishing
   your body's nutrients, and especially the fried dumplings," Kobayashi
   said. "And there are certain things about eating I won't miss--mostly
   the hot dogs."

