
   MISSOULA, MT--University of Montana wildlife biologist and Herbert R.
   Braithwaite Foundation research grant recipient Dr. James Neuthom has
   spent his entire $275,000 grant--intended for the study of whirling
   disease on rainbow trout--on such items as a 15-foot sailboat, scented
   stationery, and several dozen boxes of chocolate, according to
   documents he submitted to the foundation Tuesday.
   [4]Enlarge Image Research Grant 

   Neuthom spent $7,000 on a trip with Hamilton to Lake Tahoe, which
   contains no trout.

   Neuthom is now seeking additional Braithwaite Foundation funds to
   continue his desperate attempt to win the heart of his 23-year-old
   research assistant, Betsy Hamilton.

   "During the course of my project, I have encountered some unforeseen
   but truly vital expenses," read the introduction to Neuthom's 47-page
   project proposal, which details predicted outlays through 2008, most
   notably an additional $60,000 in "part-time female research-assistant
   salaries." "This money is needed to continue the very important work
   I'm doing with Betsy, who is a talented and beautiful young woman."
     Hamilton

   Hamilton

   The application also noted increased travel and laboratory expenses
   for the upcoming year, including first-class airfare and luxury
   accommodations for two to the National Oceanic and Atmospheric
   Administration's annual convention, a powerful telescope "perfect for
   warm, starry June evenings," and $275 for a custom-made, tailored lab
   coat.

   Representatives for the Braithwaite Foundation are currently reviewing
   Neuthom's expenditures, and have not yet decided whether to contribute
   further money to his studies.

   "We're impressed with all the energy Dr. Neuthom has poured into this
   endeavor already, but he insists much, much more work needs to be done
   before he produces any definitive results," foundation director Ted
   Sengupta said. "Before funding his new proposal, we'd like to see what
   discoveries he made while studying 'the effect of moonlight on
   Montana's native trout populations,' which he chose to research on a
   quiet, isolated lake 150 miles away from the established site of his
   study."

   "We're sure he has a good reason, but $1,500 for a singing Italian
   gondolier seems a bit curious," Sengupta added.

   Sengupta said that, in the Braithwaite Foundation's long history of
   funding ecological research, he has never seen an aquatic wildlife
   study require so many fresh-cut flowers.

   Sources at the University of Montana say they have rarely encountered
   an established researcher as generous as Neuthom, who often spends
   long hours in the lab with his young assistant, helping her
   participate in every aspect of the study, even those for which she is
   not technically qualified. He also frequently offers to drive Hamilton
   home in the Wildlife Research Center's newly acquired Corvette.

   "I thought that grant would last Jim [Neuthom] at least two years, but
   I simply didn't realize how many hot-air balloon rides, CDs, and
   spontaneous dinners at tiny French restaurants are required for an
   in-depth trout study," said UM professor of agriculture Steven
   Czymedia, who claimed he was "fascinated" by Neuthom's new theory that
   fine champagne might be directly related to rainbow trout migratory
   routes. "The subject is obviously very near and dear to his heart.
   I've never seen him so excited. I wish him the best."

   Hamilton, who plans to list her involvement with the project on her
   medical school applications next year, could not be reached for
   comment. However, her roommate, Kelly Deem, said she believes Hamilton
   has enjoyed her experience as a research assistant, since the flexible
   schedule works around her classes and allows her to spend more time
   with her fiancé.

   According to the Braithwaite Foundation's internal auditor Michael
   Romero, if Neuthom has misused funds, the organization will take
   appropriate measures.

   "We have a team carefully examining every receipt submitted by Dr.
   Neuthom over the last few months," Romero said. "If anything untoward
   has happened here, my assistant, Emily will find it. She's really
   quite something, you know."

