
   WELLTON, AZ--Henry Leighty, a 32-year-old Arizona native and insurance
   claims adjuster, reportedly had such a huge crush on his girlfriend,
   Stacy Tompkins, 29, that he just had to marry her in a small ceremony
   Sunday which he totally dreams about every night when he goes to bed.

   Insiders close to Leighty suggested that he probably wanted to marry
   her for, like, ever.
   [4]Enlarge Image Man Likes Woman So Much He Marries Her 

   Leighty and Tompkins probably went right home to smooch and tickle
   each other after this.

   "Stacy and I are so happy," said Leighty, who mailed dozens of
   embossed invitations with little birds and flowers on them months
   before the wedding to ensure no one would miss his extra-special
   afternoon of girl-kissing. "For our honeymoon, we're going to spend
   some time [Frenching] in Saint Lucia."

   Leighty's parents, David and Kathy, attended the ceremony, as did
   Leighty's two sisters, brother, and super-special someone, Tompkins,
   whom he adores so much he had to get a priest to make them husband and
   wife forever and ever--just like he always wanted. To honor the event,
   Leighty wore a tailored Armani tuxedo, hired a local string quartet to
   perform the traditional wedding march, and actually held his
   girlfriend's hand at least twice. Gross.

   According to Leighty, the couple began planning the wedding shortly
   after their engagement last June, when the lover boy finally admitted
   what everyone already knew: that he couldn't wait to spend the rest of
   his life with a girl.

   "We had been dating for five years, and it seemed like the perfect
   time," Leighty said, while everybody puked. "She's a really great
   person."

   After professing a bunch of sappy vows he probably actually meant,
   Leighty open-mouth kissed his bride in front of friends and family and
   nobody even tried to stop him.

   Immediately following the ceremony, the wedding party moved to the
   nearby Wellton Country Club, where the new Mr. and Mrs.
   Leighty--blech--joined their guests in a celebration of the couple's
   disgusting feelings for each other with food, dancing, and making-out.
   Witnesses say Leighty also hired a wedding photographer to take
   pictures that would last for all eternity so the groom could go home
   later and practice kissing with them.

   Best man Derek Heidel said he "couldn't be happier" for the couple,
   whom he first met during his undergraduate studies at the University
   of Arizona and apparently likes so much he should probably just marry
   both of them in some stupid three-way lovefest.

   "The ceremony was beautiful," said Heidel, who is either blind or
   retarded if he didn't notice all the sick touching going on. "I felt
   so honored to be standing next to Henry at this important time in his
   life. I know they'll have a long and happy marriage together."

    Leighty, who witnesses claim they saw writing "Mr. and Mrs. Leighty"
   all over their joint checking account forms, said he "can't imagine"
   his life without Stacy. "She's got such a wonderful sense of humor,"
   he said over and over as if anyone cared.

   Leighty went on to say something like, "Ooh, this is my wife whom I
   love. I love her so much I want to marry her again because I love her
   so much, I do, I really do." He totally said that, reporters at the
   event swear to God.

   Though the couple had initially planned to get married sometime this
   summer, the date was moved up to November because of Tompkin's
   mother's failing health. Despite some initial concerns that the couple
   would not be able to reschedule the event due to their hectic schedule
   of sitting in a tree and k-i-s-s-i-n-g, the two were able to
   successfully transition through the next phases of their
   courtship--love and marriage.

   In analyzing relationships similar to the newly wedded couple's,
   experts predict that, within four to six months, Leighty and Tompkins
   are most likely going to do it, probably resulting in a baby in a baby
   carriage.

   How gay.

