   Patriots Stunned By Mere 17-Point Victory

   BOSTON--The Patriots organization is reeling this week following their
   narrow 34-17 victory over the lowly Browns, taking stock of their
   game-planning methods, philosophy, and indeed their entire season in
   the aftermath of a game in which they gained barely more than 500
   total yards, came within seconds of failing to cover the spread, and
   scored only twice as much as their opponent.

   "I think it's too early to call the season a failure," said visibly
   shaken Patriots head coach Bill Belichick, who was called into the
   office of owner Robert Kraft Monday morning and officially placed on
   probation in light of the insufficiently dominant victory. "I wish to
   extend my deepest apologies to the Patriots fans and ask them to
   continue supporting the players and the team. All the blame for
   Sunday's victory has to lie with me."

   Practices have been subdued and intense this week as players struggle
   to adjust offensive and defensive schemes that were unable to put the
   Browns away until late in the first quarter, produced a scant 4.4
   yards per rush--only 0.6 yards over the league average--and had to
   rely on two interceptions and a fumble recovery to finally go up by
   more than 10 points.

   "I have to take my share of the blame," said quarterback Tom Brady,
   who has already drawn moderate criticism this season for throwing only
   three touchdowns in each of the Patriots' games so far. "With two
   minutes left in the fourth quarter, I missed [tight end] Kyle [Brady]
   in the end zone. Any other greatest quarterback makes that touchdown
   pass and we win by 24--not outstanding, but at least it would have
   given us some pride in the locker room. As it was, we couldn't look
   each other in the eye."

   Although Belichick has refused to discuss personnel moves, Patriots
   insiders say that benching Brady for next week's game against
   undefeated Dallas was a definite possibility. All-pro tight end Ben
   Watson, who only scored twice against the Browns and struggled to
   produce a 106-yard performance, will almost certainly lose his
   starting job. Backup running back Samuel Morris managed only 102 yards
   on 21 carries and is generally acknowledged to be finished in the NFL.
   And wideout Randy Moss, held to only 49 yards, is almost certain to be
   traded by next week.

   "It was probably my worst game as a pro," said linebacker Junior Seau,
   who was almost invisible for the whole game, only able to intercept a
   total of two Derek Anderson passes all game and none in the second
   half. "Not that I was alone out there. Randall [Gay] only recovered
   one fumble for a touchdown. And I hate to call out the other unit, but
   there were a couple of times when the offensive line almost gave up
   their fourth sack of the season."

   "I've tried so hard to build a culture of winning here, and this is
   the kind of win we get," Belichick said at a post-practice press
   conference Wednesday. "This team has so much wrong with it, it's hard
   to believe we've managed to only lose zero games."

