
   NEW YORK--Actor James Gandolfini, best known for his portrayal of mob
   kingpin Tony Soprano on the hit HBO show The Sopranos, was shot to
   death Tuesday in a Greenwich Village restaurant by a fan unable to
   accept the open-ended conclusion of the series finale that aired
   earlier this month.
   [4]Enlarge Image James Gandolfini 

   The dramatic finale millions of Sopranos viewers had been waiting for.

   According to police reports, 28-year-old marketing research assistant
   Louis Bowen walked into the small Italian restaurant Occhiuto's at
   approximately 7:40 p.m. and headed directly toward Gandolfini's table.
   Bowen then drew a snub-nosed .38 revolver from his jacket and shot
   Gandolfini point-blank in the head three times before dropping the gun
   and calmly exiting the eatery.

   Bowen was apprehended two blocks away by two NYPD officers and
   reportedly put up no resistance.

   "I couldn't let it just hang," Bowen told police in a post-arrest
   confession released to the media. "Eight years of my life, and a
   fucking artsy cut to black? It was eating me up inside."

   In his statement, Bowen also used the word "betrayal" to describe the
   series's resolution, which he was convinced set up a climactic death
   for the sociopathic mafia don. The realization that Soprano's brutal
   life of constant fear and anxiety would have no real end slowly drove
   the obsessed Bowen over the edge.
   [5]Enlarge Image Louis Bowen 

   Gandolfini killer Louis Bowen, seized minutes after the shooting,
   confessed: "There could be no other way."

   "I had to tie up the loose ends, I just had to," Bowen said. "I'm
   positive this is exactly how [creator and executive producer] David
   Chase wanted fans to interpret the ending."

   NYPD spokesman Charles Krann expressed regret over the Gandolfini
   slaying, saying that law enforcement "should have known this was
   coming," considering the heavy foreshadowing of impending doom in The
   Sopranos'  final season and the lack of payoff.

   "The symbolism and dialogue clearly conveyed an ominous sense of death
   and decay," Krann said. "Particularly the scene in the second-to-last
   episode where Tony and his brother-in-law talk about death. So for
   Bowen, murdering the actor brought a kind of justice."

   "It probably would have all been different had there been a realistic
   chance of a Sopranos movie," Krann added.

   Gandolfini's murder comes in the wake of several recent attempts on
   the actor's life following the airing of the series finale, which
   included a car bomb that exploded when he remote-started his car, and
   an attempted garroting while he rode in the front seat of a cab.
   Though the star is mourned by millions, many expressed relief that
   Tony Soprano's saga is definitively over.

   "Thank God it finally happened," said Lenox Hill Hospital general
   surgery resident David Kinsky, who was sitting at a table adjacent to
   Gandolfini's at the time of the murder. "I just knew that was how the
   story was meant to end. After the finale, I was so anxious and
   depressed I could hardly sleep."

   Yet other eyewitnesses characterized Gandolfini's death as
   "predictable," "cheap," and "devoid of imagination."

   "I'm an intelligent person--I didn't need to be spoon-fed an ending
   like this," Occhiuto's bartender Kim Romano said. "The killer
   obviously didn't get that the finale was meant to show Tony doomed to
   live out his violent gangland existence in an infinite, monotonous
   loop. Like the Journey song at the end said, 'It goes on and on and on
   and on.'"

   Ironically, far from satisfactorily resolving the fate of Tony
   Soprano, Gandolfini's brutal slaying will most likely only intensify
   the controversy among fans, and will serve as prime water-cooler
   discussion material for days, if not weeks, to come.

   In a late-night City Hall press conference, New York mayor Michael
   Bloomberg refused to comment on the killing.

   "No, no, don't tell me what happened," said Bloomberg, hastily
   plugging his ears. "I TiVo'ed the last six episodes but I've been too
   busy to watch them. No spoilers, please."

