
   LOS ANGELES--Acting on information gathered from billboards,
   alternative weeklies, and Internet banner ads, an FBI strike team
   liberated 14 dazed, sallow, and undernourished American Apparel models
   in a raid on the controversial organization's downtown Los Angeles
   compound early Monday.

   "There were girls lying everywhere--draped over furniture, sprawled
   spread-eagled in the corner, and huddled close like animals," FBI
   Special Agent Curtis Froman, who oversaw  the raid, said at a press
   conference. "Many of them had been given nothing more than a pair of
   tube socks or men's briefs to wear."
   [4]Enlarge Image American Apparel 

   Law enforcement officials continued clearing models from the compound
   into the early morning hours.

   Froman said it took agents nearly 20 minutes to cut through the
   holding-cell padlocks, only to find the ambiguously ethnic-looking
   captives living in "unspeakable conditions."

   "They just stared up at us with blank expressions of utter confusion,"
   Froman added. "I don't think they'd seen the sun in weeks."

   Nine American Apparel security enforcers were also killed during the
   raid.

   The models, who range in age from 18 to 22 but appear to be 12 to 14,
   were taken to an emergency safehouse where they were given food,
   clothing, and access to soap. Officials said they were conducting
   tests to determine whether the girls were subjected to brainwashing
   during their captivity.

   "I thought it would never end," said Fiara, a Brazilian-Finnish
   brunette who was held in an empty white room for weeks in nothing but
   Lycra tights and a halter top. "I can't believe how good it feels to
   wear something that buttons again."

   After freeing the captives, many of whom appeared drugged, agents
   seized thousands of amateur Polaroids and several dozen pairs of
   oversized sunglasses whose purpose remains unclear, FBI reports said.
   [5]American Apparel Slideshow 

   Evidence From The Case

   "We may never know the full extent of what went on in there," Special
   Agent Hugh Conroy said. "We do know they were held against their will
   in an airless, windowless basement under harsh fluorescent lights,
   forced to sign liability waivers, and posed in contorted positions on
   bare cement floors. "The humiliating combinations of flimsy unitards,
   leg warmers, and '70s-inspired tank tops they were forced to wear
   clearly show a deranged mind at work. Those poor, poor girls."

   Several models said they were initially drawn in by American Apparel's
   progressive environmental policies, sweatshop-free manufacturing, and
   youthful corporate identity. But their dreams of success were soon
   shattered.

   "Before I knew it, I was squatting on the floor in this humid room
   with a camera pointed at my crotch," said model Gabrielle, whose image
   can be found on the back page of this newspaper.

   Law enforcement agencies have long suspected that the company's
   much-vaunted vertically integrated structure deliberately hid the
   unpleasant realities of this international model-exploitation ring.
   Despite their ongoing investigations, agents present during the raid
   were "completely unprepared" for the level of degradation they
   discovered inside the American Apparel facility.

   "I'll never forget those hollow, emotionless eyes," Special Agent Jane
   Cosgrove said. "I don't care how many stock options they were
   given--nothing is worth what those girls went through."

   Still at large, FBI sources say, is the models' alleged captor, a
   shadowy, unkempt, elaborately facial-haired figure in his late 30s or
   early 40s known only as "the Creepy Man."

