
   HOLLYWOOD--According to sources from every imaginable demographic
   across the United States, Canada, Europe, and the rest of the
   civilized world, Academy Award-winning actor and two-time People
   magazine "Sexiest Man Alive" George Clooney is looking good.
   [4]Enlarge Image George Clooney 

   Clooney looking, as always, good.

   "I saw him on the cover of Vanity Fair, clean shaven, and he was
   looking good," Austin-area film and TV buff David Haas said Monday.
   "Then I saw him on the cover of GQ with a few days' growth, and he was
   still looking good. He's been looking good since he was Dr. Doug Ross
   on ER, and he'll probably be looking good for his next 20 roles."

   "I wish I looked one tenth as good as he's looking," Haas added.

   Clooney - whose steely gaze and easygoing personality have
   consistently captivated millions around the globe, across all
   categories of race, religion, class, gender, and sexual orientation -
   has for the past 25 years attained the highest possible scores in
   every known measure of physical, psychological, and spiritual
   attractiveness.

   A recent poll conducted by the Pew Research Center revealed that 18
   percent of respondents described Clooney as looking "distinguished,"
   11 percent found him looking "sharp," and 3 percent found him looking
   "square-jawed and rugged, yet stately and reserved, as one would
   expect a baron or king to look."

   The poll had no statistical margin of error.

   "When you think of George Clooney, the first thing you think is
   'sexy,'" said Julia Allison, editor-at-large for Star magazine. "The
   second thing you think is 'hunky,' and the third thing is 'dishy.'
   Then you think that, even if he were to get into a disfiguring
   accident, he would probably still come out with a face too dreamy for
   words. I love you, George Clooney."

   Whether viewing Clooney in a meticulously posed portrait by famed
   celebrity photographer Annie Leibowitz, in a candid photo toweling off
   his tousled hair near a pool, or in a paparazzi snapshot emerging from
   a grocery store, modern science remains unable to quantify just how
   phenomenally attractive the universally beloved Kentucky native
   actually is.
   [5]Enlarge Image George Clooney 

   Christ, how can you resist this guy?

   "The subject's masculine yet disarmingly friendly features, from what
   we have been able to determine, do not appear to be constricted by the
   laws of physics," said Princeton University geneticist Dr. Janet
   Hargrove, whose exhaustive, decade-long study of Clooney's appearance
   concluded that the 46-year-old has only gotten better-looking with
   time. "From his modest beginnings as George Burnett, the long-haired
   repairman on the 1980s sitcom The Facts of Life, onward through his
   sexy ascent to Hollywood leading man, his facial features have defied
   the Second Law of Thermodynamics by being impervious to entropy."

   Hargrove continued, "Unlike most carbon-based organisms, which will,
   over time, succumb to the ravages of cellular decomposition and
   genetic degradation, Clooney, with his puppy-dog eyes and
   salt-and-pepper hair, has aged like a fine wine."

   The multitalented actor-director-producer-humanitarian has further
   impressed audiences and critics alike by choosing his projects
   judiciously, working on films with artistic integrity and social
   merit, and lending his A-list status to high-profile charity work. His
   down-to-earth persona and deep belief in equality for all--as
   evidenced on the set of Three Kings, where he came to blows with
   director David O. Russell over the treatment of an extra--only adds to
   his overwhelming charisma. Plus, sources agree, he has this little
   thing he does with his eyebrow that is just adorable.

   "Just look at the guy," Center for Media Studies director Robert Kubey
   said. "That jaw, those eyes. And he's not just some pretty face--he's
   a very talented actor. Even I would probably follow him to the end of
   the earth if he asked me to, and I've been happily married for 14
   years."

   Despite the mounting scientific evidence and overwhelming public
   sentiment, some continue to disagree with the assessment that Clooney
   is looking good.

   "Looking good?" Nutley, NJ resident Laura Fine said. "You must be
   kidding. Did you see Ocean's Thirteen? He's looking better than ever."

   Clooney, in typical humble fashion, had no comment on this story.

