
   TOKYO--Japanese government officials confirmed Monday that the damage
   wrought on Japan's national infrastructure by the July 16th
   earthquake--particularly on the country's protective force field,
   quantum teleportation system, zero-point fusion energy broadcasting
   grid, and psychodynamic communications network--was severe enough to
   set the technologically advanced island nation back approximately 300
   years to a primitive mid-22nd-century state of existence.

   "Japan finds itself in crisis, with our society and culture
   temporarily reverting to a pre-cyberunification era," said Japanese
   prime minister Shinzo Abe, communicating non-telekinetically for the
   first time in his nearly 150 years of post-cryogenic life. "Though
   many citizens have been limited to algorithm-based emotion detection,
   neutron baths, speed limits below the speed of light, and other
   barbaric inconveniences for over a week now, I promise we will pull
   through."
   [4]Enlarge Image Earthquake Sets Japan Back To 2147 

   Officer Hideo Shimura (left) and his cloned selves attempt to free
   quake victims trapped under rubble.

   Abe rejected persistent calls to simply reboot the damaged nation,
   saying that such a measure could result in the loss of vital data,
   such as Niigata Prefecture and sections of Mount Fuji.

   The quake, which was centered in the bluefin tuna-cloning fields near
   the northwest city of Kashiwazaki, measured bb460.c22/k, or the rough
   equivalent of 6.8 on the less sophisticated Western Richter scale. It
   resulted in the first confirmed human or human-hybrid fatality in
   Japan in over 60 years, and more than 700 injuries. Citizens'
   protective exoskeletons reportedly remained operational through the
   first wave of seismic activity and three of the four aftershocks.
   According to first responders, injured exoskeletons were hastily
   repaired with antiquated third-generation nanotechnology, while
   subatomic robots were released into the bloodstream to fix any
   irregularity they could recognize.

   "The earthquake destroyed our connection with the Trinity Flow, the
   frequency that harmonizes the...you would say, I think,
   'computer'?...with the daemonetic implants in our citizens'
   overbrains," scientist Hiroshi Ishiguro-Prime of the TechnoDiet told
   Western reporters.

   Teleportation of food and water remains at a standstill as technicians
   in Kobe continue to fix the extensive damage to the
   eight-million-yottabyte mainframe computer, a four-by-three-inch
   quantum femtoprocessor responsible for accessing and fulfilling the
   thoughts and desires of all Japanese.
   [5]Enlarge Image Quake victims 

   Quake victims wander the streets in search of synthetic water and a
   neural implant charging station.

   The United States' offer of $20 million and a shipment of steel,
   tractors, forklifts, and cranes was politely declined.

   The prime minister said that the greatest effort would be exerted on
   rebuilding the Procross Buster Quasigravitic Lensing Frame, the motive
   force behind Japan's automated network of roads, aerobuildings, and
   levitation canals. The total cost of the project, the prime minister
   speculated, is somewhere in the ë70 trillion range, a majority of
   which will be underwritten by Nippon Tertius, a transubsidiary
   civilization in the Haltropic galaxy.

   Meanwhile, hundreds of thousands of people throughout Japan continue
   to live in desperate circumstances. Those whose metahabitats were
   destroyed in the quake are being issued replacements, though citizens
   are expected to grow them themselves. Kyoto resident Aiko Shunji
   criticized the homes' reconfiguring walls and blink-controlled climate
   as "relics of the past" that are "barely suitable for humans, let
   alone for members of Japan's Glorious and Peaceful Ninth Recension."

   "The older generations can talk all they want about the virtues of
   eating meals in pill form and taking the moving sidewalk instead of
   the wormhole, but this is just plain deprivation, and it sucks,"
   Shunji, 92, said. "It doesn't help that recovery efforts have been so
   slow. Why is it taking so long for officials to reconnect something as
   basic as the Neural Net?"

   Abe reassured citizens that the disaster was merely a temporary
   setback.

   "It should only be a matter of days before the Asahi Ultima Crisis
   chronotriggered reversion engine is once more online," Abe said.
   "Citizens of Japan, I promise you: Once our folded-space-time
   technology is again functional, this whole earthquake will never have
   happened."

