
   WASHINGTON, DC--In an unexpected move that shocked White House staff
   and stunned the nation, President George W. Bush arrived unannounced
   at the Oval Office Monday.
   [4]Enlarge Image Bush 

   President Bush exits Marine One at the start of his four-hour visit to
   Washington's White House.

   Bush, who flew in from his home in Texas, was greeted by security
   forces upon landing outside the White House, and quickly escorted
   through the building's back entrance. Wearing a special suit-and-tie
   uniform intended to boost morale and show support for men and women
   serving in the Beltway, Bush entered the East Room at about 3:30 p.m.
   and addressed a bewildered but enthusiastic crowd of staff members.

   "Am I late?" Bush joked to the group of approximately 200, who were
   led to believe they would be attending a ceremony to honor Secretary
   of Transportation Mary Peters. Bush's entrance received a standing
   ovation.

   "It is incredible to see firsthand what you brave men and women do
   every day," Bush said to rousing applause. "You are all heroes."

   Telling the group he wished he had the time to work alongside each and
   every one of them, Bush made general inquiries about conditions at the
   executive mansion, recruitment of new personnel, and where everyone
   was eating for lunch.

   According to sources close to the president, Bush barely had time to
   rest during the four-hour visit. He first met face-to-face with
   several high-ranking U.S. officials, who briefed him on the situation
   in Washington. Bush then signed a number of documents, took a guided
   tour of the facilities, and in a symbolic show of support for the
   current administration, shook hands with the vice president.
   [5]Enlarge Image Bush 

   Bush poses with a White House official during his brief stopover.

   Bush was also granted permission to sit in on an important Cabinet
   meeting concerning U.S. counterterrorism efforts. Those who were
   present said the president mostly observed, but noted that he did ask
   "a lot" of questions. Afterward, Bush sat behind the Oval Office desk
   and shuffled papers for 15 minutes while news photographers snapped
   photographs.

   For most members of the White House staff, it was their first chance
   to meet the president. Many said they were "overcome" with excitement.

   "When I was getting ready for work this morning, the last person I
   ever thought I'd see was the president of the United States," said
   Alexander Mistri, special assistant to the president for legislative
   affairs.

   "I actually got to shake hands with the president," Secretary of Labor
   Elaine Chao said. "He seems like a very nice man in person."

   While Bush made surprise trips to work in August 2004 and stopped by
   in July 2005 to pick up a paycheck, Monday's visit marked his first
   extended stay since last December.

   For security reasons, the trip was shrouded in secrecy. Sources say
   the president was ushered out of his Crawford, TX home just before
   noon Monday, while his family and closest friends were under the
   assumption that he was sleeping in, per normal vacation protocol. Only
   a few officials were informed of the trip, including his chief of
   staff Joshua Bolten, Defense Secretary Robert Gates, and Bush's
   fishing buddy Dale.

   Many claim the trip was staged as a "media ploy" intended to convince
   the public that the administration's occupation of Washington, D.C. is
   not a lost cause.

   "President Bush wants us to believe that he is in touch with the Bush
   administration," political analyst Garry Wills said. "But this is too
   little, too late. Mr. Bush has staked his legacy on the success of the
   work being done in the White House, but if I were him, I'd be thinking
   more about an exit strategy than rallying the grunts on the ground."

   Despite such criticisms, Bush's visit ended on a positive note. At
   4:55 p.m. Monday, he gave a parting speech to staff, thanking them for
   their hard work, explaining that the future of the country rests in
   their hands, and promising that they would all be sent home to their
   families "very soon."

