
   HOUSTON--Local resident Ethan Kendler's description of his sexual
   fantasies to girlfriend Rebecca LaBatt veered awkwardly from the kinky
   to the banal Sunday, as a raunchy but emotionally honest expression of
   carnal desire degenerated into inoffensive, marginally erotic
   entreaties.

   "We meet up with your friends Kelly and Tiffany at a bar, or just
   Kelly, actually, and we get kind of drunk," said Kendler, 25, a bike
   shop technician, as he snuggled with LaBatt in his one-bedroom
   apartment. "While we're playing pool, she bends over to line up her
   shot and we notice she's not wearing any panties."
   [4]Enlarge Image Sexual Fantasy 

   "That's when we decide that she's had too much to drink and escort her
   home," added Kendler, who had quickly noted LaBatt's silent reaction.
   "Because it's not safe for her to walk home alone at night."

   Kendler, who has been dating LaBatt, 26, since May, reportedly leaped
   at her invitation to share his sexual fantasies, eager to divulge the
   various scenarios of voyeurism and exhibitionism he had kept to
   himself for a decade. But his shyness soon returned last week after a
   description of spying on his girlfriend through her door while she
   fondled herself caused the corners of LaBatt's mouth to turn down
   slightly. Kendler muttered that he was "just kidding" and quickly
   abandoned the scenario.

    "So on the way home from dropping off Kelly, ensuring that she safely
   gets inside her apartment, we pass through a dark alley and I tie you
   up," Kendler said. "With the gentle embrace of my arms. And I hold you
   tight as a soft mist covers us. And my hand moves toward your, your
   hand so I can pull, or guide you willingly, back to my place, and
   climb into my nice big warm bed."

    Alarmed that LaBatt had not met his gaze for several seconds, Kendler
   chose not to relate his desire to dress her like a schoolgirl, apply
   nipple clamps, and play sadistic headmaster.

   A desperate Kendler quickly cast his eyes around his apartment in
   search of something that could move the fantasy in a different,
   mutually satisfying direction.

    "There's whipped cream in the refrigerator," said Kendler, encouraged
   by a fleeting gleam in LaBatt's eye. "I spray some on your...whatever
   you prefer to call your vagina. Then I get out my camera and make sure
   it's turned off."

   Kendler also substituted the word "lovingly" for the words "roughly,"
   "eagerly," and "thoroughly," and perhaps demonstrated too much
   sensitivity towards the fact that LaBatt has a twin sister.

   Kendler showed signs of achieving a possible sex-fantasy breakthrough
   when he began talking about using sex toys in his and LaBatt's
   lovemaking, and then embarked on a spanking scenario. Fearing that
   LaBatt might suspect that he was talking about his ex-girlfriend,
   however, he cut his digression short and settled on describing a
   romantic candlelight dinner.

    "I put my finger up your--" said Kendler, choking back the word
   "ass." "Lips. Up to your lips. Like, to hush you, because the moment
   is so awe-inspiring. Then I move my hand to the back of your head and,
   um, stroke your hair. And then we make gentle, respectful, beautiful
   love. Then we cuddle. And that's what my fantasy is."

    The discussion culminated with the couple engaging in enthusiastic,
   but otherwise routine missionary-position sex, which LaBatt described
   in a Monday phone interview as "nice, but not that different from
   anything we've done before."

    "I was really surprised by how tender his fantasy was," LaBatt said.
   "I was giving off all these body-language cues to get him to talk
   dirty--but I guess he's just naturally sweet and old-fashioned. I was
   really hoping he would talk about tying me up and fucking me in the
   ass. Is it just me, or are guys complete pussies?"

