
   NEW YORK--In one of the largest marketing coups in recent years,
   holiday cheer--the intangible spirit of goodwill towards man, peace on
   Earth, and warmth in the hearts of all--will now be sponsored by the
   Toyota Motor Corporation, sources reported Tuesday.
   [4]Enlarge Image Holiday Cheer 

   One of 100 million greeting cards Toyota is sending out to the
   American public this Christmas season.

   The exclusive $30 million deal, which includes promotional tie-ins
   with the season's first snowfall and the smell of roasted turkey
   wafting gently through a warm and cozy home, was signed earlier this
   week by Toyota Motor Sales U.S.A. executive vice president James
   Lentz.

   "We are very excited to be working with holiday cheer," said Lentz,
   who called the look of wonder on a young child's face and the
   company's new line of durable trucks a "natural pairing." "From now
   on, whenever anyone curls up in front of a crackling fireplace, or
   takes a moment to reflect on the importance of family, Toyota will be
   there."

   Added Lentz: "This truly is the most wonderful time of the year."

   While many details of the deal are still unclear, Lentz said that the
   automotive company has been awarded endorsement rights to all
   affection and joy experienced during the month of December. Toyota
   will also be the chief sponsor of numerous holiday-related events,
   such as the untangling of Christmas lights while listening to Bing
   Crosby sing old seasonal classics, and the making or consuming of
   eggnog.

   Additionally, as is specified in the terms of the agreement, all sugar
   plum fairies will now be preceded by a 15-second Toyota ad before
   dancing inside consumers' heads.

   "Landing holiday cheer was huge for us," said Toyota marketing
   executive Rebecca Greer, moments after announcing that the 2008
   Corolla would be the official car of sitting down with loved ones and
   reminiscing about years past. "We got trapped in a bidding war with
   General Motors over the sound of carolers beneath an open window, but
   it was worth it in the end."

   "After all, yuletide spirit is everywhere you look," Greer added. "Or,
   I should say, 'Toyota Presents: Yuletide Spirit' is everywhere you
   look."

   Toyota's marketing campaign has reportedly increased sales figures by
   3 percent in the last week alone, and investors are hopeful that the
   deal will continue to spread the holiday message of generosity,
   compassion for others, superior handling on all luxury 4Runners, good
   tidings, antilock brakes on every SUV and year-end truck, and faith in
   your fellow man.

   "We've enjoyed a steady increase in revenue since becoming a proud
   supporter of warming up with a hot cup of cocoa," Toyota promotions
   director Kyle Williamson said. "Plus, sponsoring that priceless smile
   on your wife's face Christmas morning will only open more potential
   growth markets to us."

   Toyota is not the first company to make a cross-promotional deal with
   a popular indefinable entity, however. In 2002, Johnson & Johnson
   secured a partnership with a mother's unconditional love for her
   child, while Budweiser paired up with a teenager' s desire to escape
   feelings of social anxiety and confusion in 2005.

   Despite Toyota's initial success, many market analysts claim that the
   car company may have overpaid for its abstract product placement.

   "This might have been a smart move in the 1950s, or even the '60s,
   when holiday cheer was still alive and well," Car & Driver reporter
   and family black sheep Malcolm Jones said. "But these days, Toyota
   could have gotten twice the exposure for half the cost had it
   sponsored holiday depression and ill will instead. And if they had
   been willing to buy out Lean Cuisine frozen meals' stake in post-New
   Year's resignation and apathy, the ad tie-ins could have extended well
   into January."

   While only time will tell what effect the marketing subterfuge will
   ultimately have on consumers, Toyota's tactics have already angered a
   number of Americans.

   "The holidays shouldn't be about consumerism--they should be about
   faith, and hope, and the simple pleasures in life," Chicago resident
   Samantha Bryant said. "Like the all-new Toyota Camry, for instance."

