
   KIRKSVILLE, MO--Jon Strauss, 22, a Kirksville video-store manager,
   announced Monday that he supports U.S. troops "100 percent"--with the
   exception of the ones with whom he went to high school.

   [4]Enlarge Image Area Man Supports 

   Strauss, who said he backs "99.9 percent" of America's troops.

   "My heart goes out to the troops, and I pray for their safe return,"
   said Strauss, a 1998 graduate of Kirksville High School. "Except for
   that dick Andy Tischler. I hope the Iraqis capture him and torture his
   wedgie-inflicting ass."

   Though he expressed mixed feelings about the war against Iraq, Strauss
   said he feels it is vital for Americans to stand united behind the
   nation's fighting men and women in uniform. He draws the line,
   however, at his former classmates.

   "Troy Nowicki, this guy who was in my junior-year gym class, is in the
   Navy now," Strauss said. "He was on the football team, and he used to
   love to tease me and give me purple nurples and generally make my life
   miserable. Once, he head-butted me so hard, I couldn't hear for an
   hour. Fucking asshole. Yeah, I'm really praying for his safe return."

   Strauss has tied a yellow ribbon around a tree in front of his
   parents' home, where he is temporarily living, to show his support for
   the troops. He also sports an American-flag pin on his shirt at work.

   "We can't let our soldiers feel like they're also facing an enemy on
   the homefront," Strauss said. "They have enough to worry about without
   hearing that their own country isn't behind them. Could you imagine
   how demoralizing that would be? It would be as traumatic as the time I
   had to give a speech on the Teapot Dome scandal at a school assembly,
   and Ricky Dorner kept whipping pennies at me the whole time. Ricky's a
   Marine now, and I heard his division got deployed to Tikrit, where
   they came under heavy fire from the Republican Guard. Haven't heard a
   casualty report yet."

   [5]Enlarge Image Area Man Supports Jump 

   A 1997 photo of U.S. Marine Ricky Dorner, whom Strauss called "a
   world-class asshole."

   Strauss, like many Americans, said he believes the U.S. has learned
   its lesson from its poor treatment of Vietnam War soldiers. Today,
   even the staunchest anti-war activist is likely to agree that the
   soldiers are only carrying out the will of the policy-makers and
   deserve the nation's sympathy and good wishes.

   "For a lot of young people, the military is the only option," Strauss
   said. "Like Frank Deroia, this burnout who used to sit at the back of
   the school bus and loudly make fun of my clothes every day. Well, he
   joined the Army, and now I guess he's being treated like some kind of
   hero because he was one of the troops who secured Baghdad
   International Airport. Meanwhile, I've got a bachelor's degree and I'm
   stuck in Kirksville working at Blockbuster. How is that fair?"

   Strauss' friends say they are well aware of his feelings about
   America's troops.

   "Jon was very moved by the horrible POW ordeal of Pfc. Jessica Lynch,"
   longtime friend Will Arbus said. "He said she seems like a really
   sweet girl, the kind of person who would treat classmates with
   kindness and respect. Nothing like Lance Corporal Craig Veryzer of the
   103rd Infantry. Apparently, Craig was fond of ridiculing Jon's
   less-than-perfect skin. Boy, does Jon hate that prick."

