
   ELMHURST, IL--An adjustable butterfly fuck-swing once used by Nathan
   Moscone and Sofia Klein-Moscone to have wild and uninhibited sex in
   myriad aerial positions has been slowly filling up with junk mail over
   the past several months, the couple reported Monday.
   [4]Enlarge Image Butterfly Fuck 

   At one time, the young couple considered the butterfly fuck-swing to
   be their most precious possession. In recent years, however, it has
   been eclipsed in esteem by Nathan's leather briefcase and Sofia's
   emerald earrings.

   The dozens of credit card offers, coupon flyers, and unsolicited
   catalogs were first stacked in the butterfly fuck-swing in order to
   clear off the dining table for visiting relatives, but more mail
   gradually began to accumulate on the soft vinyl seat designed to
   cushion the rapid, percussive strokes of lovemaking.

   "The wife and I sure had some crazy times on that thing before we had
   the baby," said Nathan Moscone, 37, motioning towards the adult toy,
   upon which he had just hung his suit jacket. "But it seems like
   forever since I turned her upside down in that thing and dripped hot
   wax onto her vulva. Maybe we can give it another go after we finish
   the deck. That's taking up all my spare time at the moment."

   The butterfly fuck-swing features nylon straps, padded stirrups, a
   swiveling hook, a crossbar Klein-Moscone used to grasp in the throes
   of ecstasy, and, more recently, several unread issues of O, The Oprah
   Magazine.

   Moved from the couple's bondage room, now a nursery, to the den late
   last year, the fuck-swing ended up in an ideal location to deposit
   mail deemed too unimportant for the already full rolltop desk in the
   corner. Other items, such as a box of edible lubricants and an 18-inch
   steel-studded leather paddle, were relocated to the attic to keep them
   out of the reach of the Moscones' active and inquisitive 11-month-old
   daughter, Abby.

   Klein-Moscone, 33, said that she had considered simply throwing out
   the junk mail, but balked after the last time, when she accidently
   discarded an important medical bill that had been placed in the
   butterfly fuck-swing.

   "I swear I'll get to sorting out that mail soon," said Klein-Moscone,
   who less than two years ago would strap herself into the butterfly
   fuck-swing at her husband's slightest suggestion, but now only
   interacts with the sex apparatus when rummaging through it for a Home
   Depot receipt.

   In addition to raising a baby, Moscone said that working long hours,
   volunteering at their church, and doing yard work leaves him and his
   wife very little time to read their mail and enjoy exhilarating
   sadomasochistic fucking through unconventional methods.

   "I was just thinking yesterday, Boy, I can't remember the last time I
   had my fist up my wife's asshole,"  Moscone said. "It happens to every
   marriage, I guess."

   Also noticeably absent from the couple's sexual repertoire is the
   bright purple silicone butt plug that, for the past several weeks, has
   been the favorite chew toy of their Pomeranian, Champ.

   "I'd love to give those ankle and wrist restraints another go, but for
   the life of me I can't remember where they are," said Moscone about a
   set of chained leather cuffs that are currently being used to padlock
   a composting bin in the couple's backyard. "And I haven't seen hide
   nor hair of our cock rings since we were up in Lake Geneva. We'll have
   to get some new ones, I guess."

   "Well, as soon as the family budget allows for it," he added.

   Despite being forced to retire the nipple clamps after the baby
   started nursing, the pair said they would still consider having
   exciting and adventurous sex if Klein-Moscone ever returned home from
   her advanced Pilates class with any remaining energy.

   "Last Thursday, Nathan and I wanted to take his penis prison out of
   the shed to have a little bit of fun before Dateline," said
   Klein-Moscone, referring to a rubber locking male-chastity device.
   "But, my God, was that shed a mess--we ended up just sorting junk. At
   least I found our favorite ball gag, which I'm going to hang in the
   garage so I know how far to pull the minivan in."

   Both Moscones hope to get their once-hot sex life back into gear in
   the spring, pledging to make good use of a leather hood and spreader
   bar when they try for another baby.

