
   CHARLESTON, SC--After spending two months accompanying his wife,
   Hillary, on the campaign trail, former president Bill Clinton
   announced Monday that he is joining the 2008 presidential race, saying
   he "could no longer resist the urge."

   "My fellow Americans, I am sick and tired of not being president,"
   said Clinton, introducing his wife at a "Hillary '08" rally. "For
   seven agonizing years, I have sat idly by as others experienced the
   joys of campaigning, debating, and interacting with the people of this
   great nation, and I simply cannot take it anymore. I have to be
   president again. I have to."
   [4]Enlarge Image Bill Clinton 

   "Damn, this feels good," Clinton told supporters as he shook hands in
   Charleston Monday.

   He continued, "It is with a great sense of relief that I say to all of
   you today, 'Screw it. I'm in.'"

   In a show of respect, Clinton then completed his introduction of
   Hillary Clinton, calling her a "wonderful wife and worthy political
   adversary," and warmly shook her hand as she approached the podium. A
   clearly shocked Mrs. Clinton got halfway through her speech about the
   nation's obligation to its children before walking briskly offstage.

   A spokesman for Sen. Clinton's campaign had no comment.

   "No longer will I have to endure watching candidates like Hillary
   Clinton engaging in single-pump handshakes with voters, as I use every
   last ounce of restraint not to shout out, 'No! Warm double-clasp! Warm
   double-clasp!'" Clinton said. "America deserves someone who can do it
   right."

   While the announcement has come as a surprise to many, Beltway
   observers said it was not completely unexpected, citing footage from a
   recent Democratic debate that showed Clinton fidgeting in his seat,
   gripping the arms of his chair, and repeatedly glancing at all the
   television cameras while rapidly tapping his right foot. Analysts also
   noted one debate in which Clinton mouthed responses to all the
   moderator's questions while making hand gestures to himself.

   Clinton told reporters Tuesday that seeing so many "Clinton '08"
   posters "really got [him] thinking," and said that the fact that he
   was already wearing a suit, and smiling and waving on the campaign
   trail was an added motivator.

   "From signing healthcare reform legislation, to working with
   politicians from across the aisle, to brokering international peace
   treaties with foreign dignitaries, I goddamn love being president,"
   Clinton said. "For too long has this nation been deprived of a Bill
   Clinton presidency, and for too long have I been deprived of being
   president. Now I get to experience all these wonderful things again
   myself."

   "And the applause," Clinton added. "I look forward to the endless roar
   of applause perhaps most of all."

   Since his announcement two days ago, Clinton has raised a staggering
   $550 million. He has also surged in national polls, rising from a mere
   2 percent prior to his candidacy to a commanding 94 percent, ahead of
   former front-runners Barack Obama and Hillary Clinton, who are now
   tied with 3 percent each. John Edwards withdrew from the race Tuesday,
   saying only, "I am not worthy."

   Although some have pointed out that it is unconstitutional for Clinton
   to run for a third term in office, he has silenced most critics by
   urging voters "not to worry about the Constitution for now" and
   assuring them he will address those legal issues immediately after
   regaining control of the White House.

   "All I am asking of the American people is four more years," Clinton
   said at a fundraiser Tuesday where tens of thousands of South
   Carolinians gathered to stare in gape-jawed wonderment at the former
   president. "Well, maybe eight. Actually, you know what, definitely
   eight. Eight more years."

   Thus far, the response among voters has been positive.

   "I love Bill Clinton," said Orangeburg, SC resident Marsha Demarais.
   "God, he was just so great as president. Can we just make him
   president again right now?"

   Clinton also noted that, if elected, the timing would be perfect for
   his family, as his wife has recently expressed a desire to move back
   to the D.C. area.

