
   WASHINGTON, DC--Washington police seized 22 members of the House of
   Representatives, 12 members of the Senate, and more than 100 fighting
   cocks Monday night, in the latest crackdown on blood sports at the
   highest levels of the U.S. government.

   [4]Enlarge Image 34 Congressmen Arrested In D.C. Cockfighting
   Crackdown 

   Congressmen Don Nickles (R-OK), Charles Schumer (D-NY), Dick Gephardt
   (D-MO), and John Lewis (D-GA) minutes before their arrest.

   "At 1 o'clock this morning, uniformed officers, acting on tips from
   undercover operatives, staged simultaneous raids on four known beltway
   pits, arresting a large bipartisan coalition of legislative
   cockfighting enthusiasts," D.C. police chief Charles H. Ramsey told
   reporters Tuesday. "Of course, we were aware of the longstanding
   cockfighting problem, but we were shocked to catch so many highly
   placed lawmakers in the act of betting on, training, and selling
   fighting birds--or, in the case of [Rep.] Tammy Baldwin [D-WI],
   operating back-alley clubs."

   A full report of evidence gathered in the raids will be issued later
   this week, but police have released certain facts, including details
   about a breeding network for elite fighting cocks--prized for their
   extreme aggressiveness and high pain threshold--run by members of the
   House Judiciary Committee. Undercover officers said they witnessed
   committee members selling birds to other congressmen for hundreds of
   dollars apiece.

   Evidence also included photos of congressional motor-pool limousines
   that had been converted into "crating trucks" to transport cocks from
   venue to venue. Perhaps most stunning of all were the firsthand
   sightings of cocks, their crests and wattles surgically removed, being
   trained to fight with blades tied to their natural spurs in a 400-bird
   "hardening pen" in the basement of the Old Executive Office Building,
   just blocks away from the White House.

   Detective William Gargano of the D.C. vice squad was present for the
   previous evening's raid on El Pollo Diablo, a cockfighting pit located
   among several blocks of abandoned warehouses in southeast D.C.

   "I was there shooting undercover video when detectives and
   animal-control operatives, working in a combined task force, busted
   down all the doors to the place at once," Gargano said. "It had
   already been shaping up to be one hell of a night. [Sen. Dick] Lugar
   [R-IN] was a few hundred dollars ahead in the pit. His famous Stag
   Hammer just couldn't lose. Well, that didn't sit well with [Sen.]
   Hillary Clinton [D-NY], who accused him of giving his bird ginger and
   amphetamine suppositories to make it fight harder."

   Continued Gargano: "Then [Sen. Dianne] Feinstein [D-CA] tried to suck
   her rooster's punctured lung clear so it could last a whole match, but
   she swallowed too much blood and puked everywhere. [Supreme Court
   Justice David] Souter had just broken up a fight between [Rep.] Mark
   Kennedy [R-MN] and [Rep. Jim] Oberstar [D-MN], after they knocked the
   damn carcass barrel all over the floor. When the raid happened, I was
   relieved. It was getting pretty dicey in there."

   The raids themselves were carried out with minimal resistance. Only
   Sen. John Edwards (D-NC) needed to be restrained and charged with
   resisting arrest.

   [5]Enlarge Image 34 Congressmen Arrested In D.C. Cockfighting
   Crackdown jump 

   Sen. Orrin Hatch (R-UT) inspects fighting birds during a cock-buying
   trip to Tibet.

   Ramsey said that, though formal charges have yet to be filed, the
   congressmen taken into custody will most likely be charged with
   illegal gambling, animal cruelty, and collusion. Nearly all of the
   arrested cockfighting enthusiasts are out of jail after posting bail.
   However, not one of the arrested parties, even those who were not
   elected officials, has agreed to speak openly to reporters.

   One legislator who asked not to be identified said the charges were
   "petty," and that the indicted members of Congress were victims of a
   "witch-hunt."

   "Although violent, cockfighting is a traditional part of the American
   lawmaker's way of life," the legislator said. "It's a sport, with a
   code of conduct the uninitiated simply wouldn't understand. I'm sure
   many of the good people of Oklahoma, hypothetically speaking, would
   agree that there's a place for different people's tastes in this great
   country. As far as the cruelty charges go, that's ludicrous. I love my
   fighting cocks--my wife likes to say I treat my champion red-eyes
   better than I treat her--and I'm sure my fellow Congressmen would say
   much the same."

   As troubling as the mere existence of a legislative cockfighting ring
   may be, lawmakers who were not implicated in the scandal say they are
   more disturbed by evidence that legislation has been derailed,
   altered, or passed based on successes and failures in the cockfighting
   pit.

   "One week, the Civic Funding for Secondary Education Act is dead in
   the water, with no compromise on the horizon," Sen. John McCain (R-AZ)
   said. "The very next week, 12 Democrats turn over on their votes. I
   heard strange rumors that some hefty debt to the Senate Republicans
   was just erased--something involving '10-to-1 odds on a one-eyed Rhode
   Island Red.' It didn't make sense until this morning, when I flipped
   on the news and saw all these same senators getting cuffed at the
   rooster pit in a basement off Constitution."

   "Now that I think about it, this may explain why the Chicken Feed
   Price Stabilization Act passed through the House so quickly last
   month," McCain added.

