
   2006 was the year Vice President Dick Cheney broke from his
   traditionally parsimonious relationship with the news media, and
   rewarded journalists and commentators with an extremely provocative
   news item involving the near-point-blank shooting of 78-year-old
   friend and campaign contributor Harry Whittington on a Texas ranch.
   [4]Enlarge Image Vice President R 

   Spraying my elderly hunting companion in the face with birdshot was
   the least I could do for the press corps I love.

   Vice President Dick Cheney

   When the vice president addressed the media two days after the
   incident, many of those in the press corps were moved to tears.

   "Christmas has come early this year," Cheney quipped to the
   appreciative crowd of reporters in the White House press briefing
   room. "But in all seriousness, you truly deserve this gift, which I
   happily bestow on you in great thanks and humble appreciation for all
   you've done these past five years. May you make the most of it."

   "Considering all the trouble you go through to cover the White House,
   spraying my elderly hunting companion in the face with birdshot was
   the least I could do," he said.

   "I love you all," he added.

   Cheney said the "token of [his] affection" was intended not only for
   reporters, but for anyone in any media-related position. "Late-night
   talk-show hosts, pundits, parody songwriters, and even bloggers--from
   the bottom of my heart, I want you all to have this."
     Vice President Whittington

   Cheney urged the recipients to exploit the way he seemingly acted out
   of sheer malice and callous indifference in his handling of the
   incident, inviting them to make jokes inspired by, but not limited to,
   his authoritarian persona, his pro-gun position, and the bumbling
   cartoon hunter Elmer Fudd.

   "I can't remember the last time a high-level administration official
   has taken the time to do something so wonderful just for us," NBC
   Chief White House Correspondent David Gregory said shortly after
   Cheney's announcement. "Mr. Vice President, we salute you."

   The incident quickly garnered worldwide attention and deep media
   gratitude.

   "I could have kissed him," The Washington Post's Richard Cohen said.
   "And when it came out that his favorite hobby is slaughtering dozens
   of defenseless pheasants who have no chance to escape from the
   confines of the hunting ranch, that was the icing on the cake."

   Cohen added, "I doubt we'll ever see a vice president as kindhearted
   and generous as this one."

