
   WASHINGTON--Responding to a foul stench emanating from the mouths of
   Americans nationwide, officials from the U.S. Department of Breath and
   Human Services issued an emergency announcement Tuesday warning that
   American breath quality has been elevated to "stank mouth," the
   poorest single rating in the nation's 231-year history.
   [4]Enlarge Image U.S. Breath Reaches All-Time Worst 

   DBHS Secretary Michael Leavitt shields reporters from his coffee
   mouth.

   In a solemn announcement, DBHS Secretary Michael Leavitt informed the
   nation that his organization initially considered ignoring the
   findings, believing that the situation would resolve itself after the
   next routine tooth-brushing.

   "After several days with no improvement in odor, it became painfully
   clear that this agency simply had to say something," Leavitt said.

   Leavitt maintained that DBHS is doing all it can and will continue to
   observe the worsening crisis from at least three feet away.

   Added Leavitt, "I am compelled to ask the American people: What did
   you eat?"

   Attempting to handle the awkward national emergency in the most
   delicate manner, health officials at first theorized that everyone in
   the country had been out late the night before and did not have a
   chance to freshen up in the morning. But after more than 400,000
   uncomfortable conversations, officials deemed it necessary to notify
   the American public in order to prevent the loss of more social lives.

   "We can no longer afford to turn our heads away and ignore this
   problem," Leavitt said.

   Leavitt urged all Americans to accept a breath mint or a stick of gum,
   or, if such items are not available, a carbonated drink, which he
   claimed was not clinically proven to be an effective remedy, although
   there is some evidence that the carbon dioxide molecules may in effect
   "burn away" stink germs temporarily.

   Despite the urgency and magnitude of DBHS's announcement, some critics
   maintain that the response has been shortsighted and only aimed at
   making the problem temporarily smell like mint. Some even claim the
   putrid smell might already be irreversible.

   "This Band-Aid approach will work, but only for a few hours at most,"
   said Walter Romano, D.D.S., a Cleveland-area dentist who has begun
   handing out free toothbrushes and stickers depicting sound oral
   hygiene to residents in his area. "This country hasn't flossed in
   years. In fact, I believe some people have even made the ill-advised
   decision to gargle not with mouthwash, but almost exclusivley with dog
   shit."

   Others claim the problem is even worse than health officials are
   letting on.

   "This is a full-blown stenchademic," said Dr. Guy Hammond, a leading
   researcher of smelliness, who added that the catastrophe will only
   worsen with dinner approaching. "Before long, the U.S. will surpass
   even Britain as the nation with the worst breath in the Western
   world."
   [5]Enlarge Image 

   A Tempe, AZ resident's mouth is sanitized by emergency oral hygiene
   workers.

   According to an independent study conducted by Hammond, the percentage
   of Americans whose breath could scare the stink off a skunk increased
   dramatically over the past year, from 17 percent to 29 percent, while
   the number of citizens whose breath could peel paint off the wall went
   up from 23 percent to 45 percent. The remainder of Americans, the
   study found, had breath so bad it could sink a battleship.

   While no direct cause has been determined for the sudden spike in
   ass-mouth, officials believe it may be connected to a combination of
   garlic, onion, meat, cheese, tobacco, coffee, alcohol, plaque,
   laziness, and bodily fluids.

   With initial tests showing the rancid odor to be virtually impervious
   to multiple applications of Big Red, Leavitt said his agency is urging
   citizens to avoid inhaling through their noses, and cover their mouths
   when they talk.

   "Sadly, millions of Americans were raised to believe they could cup
   their hand and put it over their face to smell their breath," Leavitt
   told reporters. "But our top scientists and health experts informed me
   personally about 20 minutes ago that this method does not work."

   DBHS has embarked on a widespread campaign to eliminate the deadly
   odors found in almost every mouth in the country.  Refreshing relief
   has been slow to come, however: Efforts to deliver 30,000 gallons of
   ACT rinse to the hardest-hit regions of the country have stalled
   because so many National Guardsmen are already deployed in Iraq and
   the rest refused to go anywhere near the most troubled cities. In
   addition, attempts by FEMA workers to distribute Tic Tacs to citizens
   in Alabama and Texas also failed when hundreds were injured attempting
   to open the plastic boxes' flip-action lids.

   On Wednesday, officials at the Center for Gum Disease Control and
   Prevention announced plans to quarantine those with the severest
   halitosis, though they warned that concentrating so much rotting
   breath in one place could make the entire nation puke simultaneously.

