
   WASHINGTON--With more American military casualties in 2007 than any
   year since the war began, a bipartisan group of House representatives
   introduced a bill Monday that calls for nearly 4,000 U.S. soldiers who
   have been killed in Iraq to be brought back to life.
   [4]Enlarge Image Legislators 

   Cosponsors John Boehner, left, and Bruce Braley, middle, told
   reporters how the bill would make everything all better Tuesday.

   "These brave men and women gave their lives for our country," Rep.
   Wayne Gilchrest (R-MD), a cosponsor of the bill, told Congress
   yesterday. "The least we can do is give them back."

   Though most Democrats and Republicans remain deadlocked on the issue
   of a possible troop withdrawal, leaders on both sides have been able
   to agree that bringing thousands of soldiers back from the dead and
   returning them home to their families, alive and well, like nothing
   ever happened, is the "only honorable choice."

   "Our proposal would completely change the course of the conflict from
   hundreds of people dying every day to everyone suddenly being alive
   again," said Rep. Bruce Braley (D-IA), donning a "Support Our
   Troops--Bring 'Em Back From The Dead" ribbon. "This will not only
   improve morale at home and abroad, but will also make everything all
   better."

   "I think we can all agree that making everything all better would
   vastly improve the situation in Iraq," Braley added.

   The bill, H.R. 702, stipulates that immediately upon its passage into
   law, the 4,000 brave soldiers who have lost their lives in Iraq come
   marching triumphantly over the horizon, directly into the arms of
   their loved ones, looking the same as they did on the day they left
   home. Article II, Section 3 of the bill requires that each soldier be
   carrying one apple pie, to be consumed in full with family members as
   they sit around the dinner table and laugh and sing. A proviso in
   Article III states that everything will go back to the way it was
   before.
   [5]Enlarge Image Supporters 

   Supporters of the bill march in New York.

   The bill would also prohibit troops currently stationed in Iraq from
   ever dying.

   According to House minority leader John Boehner (R-OH), the measure,
   already long overdue, is the most effective way to ensure that the
   growing casualty rate in Iraq is instantly reversed and reduced to
   zero.

   "How much longer are we going to let these troops stay deceased? Two
   years? Three years? Forever?" Boehner said. "If we allow this to
   happen, then the insurgents have already won."

   Added Boehner: "Thousands have made the ultimate sacrifice. Let's make
   sure they are repaid for that sacrifice in kind."

   Though the bill enjoys broad support, a number of politicians have
   claimed the move is shortsighted and could destabilize the region if
   the reanimated bodies of the U.S. military returned to the living
   world as undead ghouls devoid of consciousness. Braley, however,
   dismissed such fears.

   "I assure the American people that the reborn troops will appear just
   as alive and vital as they did mere moments before they were killed.
   In no way will they be an unholy abomination of undead flesh," Braley
   said.

   Scheduled to be put to a vote in December, the bill has endured
   numerous setbacks, including fierce debate over which soldier should
   be brought back to life first, a core of Republicans who say they will
   only vote yes on the condition that the reanimated troops are
   immediately redeployed to Iraq, and Sen. Ted Stevens' (R-AK) multiple
   attempts to tack a rider onto the bill that would bring back his dead
   wife.

   Though the bill is expected to pass the House, some Senators claim
   suddenly bringing back thousands of deceased Americans might send the
   wrong message to America's enemies.

   "The tide in Iraq is turning," Sen. Joseph Lieberman (ID-CT) said.
   "American men and women dying in droves has worked thus far--it is not
   time to abandon this strategy."

   Congress is also expected to begin drafting legislation that would
   completely heal all 28,385 wounded U.S. soldiers. If passed into law,
   any troops who have lost limbs to amputation, infection, or car-bomb
   explosions can expect their arms and legs to grow back within six
   months. In addition, the bill would guarantee that those suffering
   from post-traumatic stress disorder will not have post-traumatic
   stress disorder anymore.

   Even if the measure passes both the House and Senate, however,
   President Bush has promised to veto the bill.

