
   KANSAS CITY, MO--Scientists at Hallmark Cards' Center for the Research
   and Development of Sentiments announced Monday that they had
   discovered three previously unknown emotions that can be experienced
   by human beings and captured on a folded piece of card stock.
   [4]Enlarge Image Hallmark Scientists 

   Exploring The Human Psyche

   Dr. Susan McMurrough has spent years analyzing the deep, unexamined
   feelings of thousands of test subjects in order to discover new,
   marketable emotions.

   "These new Hallmark-brand feelings will fill a void that has too long
   persisted in the consumable pleasantries market," said Hallmark
   president and CEO Don Hall, Jr., speaking to reporters in front of a
   watercolor backdrop of tulips beside a pond. "They will add a whole
   new level of complexity and nuance to the way we humans relate to one
   another, and will fill in any gaps left by our 'Thinking of You' and
   'Just Because' categories."

   The first emotion the project successfully isolated was "requiapathy,"
   the combination of relief and guilt that comes with the sudden
   realization that you no longer miss a dead loved one. That discovery
   quickly led to the uncovering of "seprudity," the feeling of
   appreciating a coworker's dedication without fully understanding his
   or her job function, and "trepatiousness," a synthesis of rage and
   jealousy, though more muted and often accompanied by a sensation of
   weighlessness.

   "[Trepatiousness] appears to be a very rare emotion, almost
   exclusively experienced while in a dream state," said principal
   investigator Dr. Susan McMurrough, a leader in the field of keepsake
   science best known for her work on the revolutionary "Blank Inside"
   line of cards. "The only way to activate it during waking hours, in
   fact, is with a combination of reds, oranges, and drowsy beagles in
   top hats."

   The three emotions represent the latest discovery in the center's
   ongoing Emotions Mapping Project, a $42.4 million effort to identify
   and codify all of the mental and physiological states generated within
   the human psyche that are not currently covered by Hallmark's
   extensive line of greeting cards and collectible ornaments.
   [5]Enlarge Image Hallmark Cards 

   A prototype of one of the new cards, which will be available at
   Hallmark stores in time for Father's Day.

   In 2002, McMurrough monitored the MRI activity of nearly 10,000 test
   subjects between the ages of 25 and 40 as they described all emotions
   they had experienced in the past six months and rated each for its
   intensity, duration, and whether it would be conveyable to others by
   mail. To identify targets of further study, McMurrough's team
   referenced that data against a matrix of all possible combinations of
   the neurotransmitters that catalyze human emotion.

   "Until now, millions of people worldwide were forced to express their
   sincere and heartfelt requiapathy, seprudity, and trepatiousness with
   clumsy words and gestures," Hall said. "Our colorful and succinct
   messages will spare them countless hours of inconvenience and
   potential misunderstandings."

   After a second group of Hallmark scientists successfully replicated
   the initial study's results, the sentiments were immediately submitted
   to the U.S. Patent Office and rushed to Hallmark headquarters, where
   writers, illustrators, and graphic designers interpreted the new
   emotions in warm, concise verse; inoffensive, ingratiating humor; and
   reassuring pastel watercolors.

   "This research is not only groundbreaking--it's inspirational," said
   Mallory Jefson, a writer for Hallmark's Best Wishes department, who
   added that the emotions have led them to creative heights not reached
   since Secretaries Day became Administrative Professionals Day in 2000.
   In a single day of brainstorming, Jefson and her colleagues developed
   15 seprudity-based card concepts that incorporated cats in sunglasses,
   and 22 new coffee mugs featuring the tart-tongued, post-menopausal
   character Maxine expressing requiapathy.

   The Hallmark laboratories have been at the forefront of the greeting
   card sciences since the '40s. Their work has led to the creation of
   eight federally recognized holidays, the specification of a time frame
   in which someone ought to get well, and over a dozen flower and
   cursive-font combinations that, sales figures show, have effectively
   conveyed the complex emotional and psychological states of an
   estimated 185 million Americans.

