
   WASHINGTON, DC--In what observers are calling a "radically intense"
   move, President Clinton unveiled a new "No Fear" foreign policy
   approach Monday, stating that in the future, nations dealing with the
   U.S. should "Bring Your Spine Or Ride The Pine."

   [4]Enlarge Image Clinton Adopts New 'No Fear' Foreign Policy 

   President Clinton, sporting a new haircut and neon green Zubaz pants,
   told reporters, "There is no crying in foreign policy--shut up and
   negotiate."

   "America is, quite simply, In It To Win It," a visibly pumped Clinton
   told the assembled international press. "While this administration
   remains committed to maintaining good relations with our allies
   abroad, that's not going to stand in the way of the fact that It's Not
   Whether You Win Or Lose, It's How Bad You Beat The Other Team."

   Upon finishing his speech, Clinton vaulted over the podium and
   sprinted to the new Air Force One, a neon orange and purple Chevy Brat
   sports pickup with Tazmanian Devil mudflaps and an adhesive decal
   prominently displayed in the rear window, reading, "Clint Force
   One--All The Way With Hell To Pay." He then sped off to a D.C.-area
   shopping mall parking lot before his stunned audience could reply.

   Reports that the pickup had electric light-up neon displays around the
   license plates could not be confirmed at press time.

   "In foreign policy, Second Place Is The First Loser," the president
   said in a nationally televised speech on ESPN2 Monday night. Sporting
   wraparound multi-colored mirrored sunglasses, Clinton added, "The
   United States of America Is Agile, Mobile, Hostile, and Completely
   Fearless. No Fear!" He then grunted, striking a muscle-flexing pose
   before challenging embattled Russian President Boris Yeltsin to a
   "no-holds barred, flat-out motocross mud run," advising the Russian
   premier to "Shut Up and Hit The Dirt."

   Another aspect of the new "No Fear" policy is the requirement that all
   international treaties and other diplomatic documents be printed in
   oversized "distressed-type"-style lettering, and stored for safe
   keeping in bright green and yellow "fanny packs."

   Further, all U.S. ambassadors will be required to wear "long-in-back,
   buzzed-on-top" haircuts and attend formal diplomatic events wearing
   baggy, weightlifter-style Zubaz pants, preferably neon green or
   magenta ones, the State Department said.

   "I believe that by dressing in such an intense manner, our ambassadors
   will send a strong 'Don't Mess With The U.S.' message to foreign
   diplomats," Clinton said. "If their diplomats come dressed in B.U.M.
   Equipment gear, we will come in No Fear. If they wear Generra
   Hypercolor, we will respond with Big Johnson. The U.S. will not be
   cowed."

   Clinton added that "the United States government has Been There,
   Wrecked That."

   In addition to dress code changes, in the future, foreign policy
   strategy meetings will no longer be held at the State Department
   Building, but instead will take place at "The Quarry," an abandoned
   D.C.-area mining site where government officials convene out of the
   backs of their trucks "tailgate-style." A favorite Clinton
   administration hangout, the Quarry is where aspiring officials are
   often called upon to "prove their stuff" by diving off the uppermost
   point of "Panic Peak" into the swimming hole at the Quarry's base, an
   experience Secretary of Labor Robert Reich describes as "110 percent
   pure adrenaline overdrive, baby!"

   "At 200 mph there is no diplomatic immunity," Clinton said,
   reiterating the new American stance. "If foreign interests mess with
   the bull they can expect the horns. We have no room for crybabies in
   the emergent global economy. Bones heal, records don't. Eat my dust!"
   The president then floored it.

   Foreign reaction to the new No Fear policy has been mixed.

   Mexican President Ernesto Zedillo said, "It is of great concern to
   Mexico to suddenly be so close to a nation that is so--how do you
   say?--'balls out.' I am afraid."

   German Chancellor Helmut Kohl, on the other hand, has already
   responded with a gift to the president of an original vinyl copy of
   Boston's self-titled debut LP, originally owned by his older brother.
   The president is said to be pleased with the gesture, saying that
   Boston kicks ass.

   "Dudes, can you see it? My mustache is coming in," Clinton said in
   conclusion. "What a chick magnet that'll be."

