   A-Rod

   DENVER--Yankees third baseman Alex Rodriguez found a way to inject
   some excitement into baseball and make the slow month of October
   interesting last Sunday when he announced that he would opt out of his
   quarter-of-a-billion dollar contract with New York in order to become
   a free agent this offseason.

   The unusually slow month, the only interesting point of which was a
   seemingly unending array of baseball games--some of which even went
   past their usual nine-inning limit--was very nearly a complete
   disappointment for the league. Now, however, the clutch statement by
   Rodriguez has inspired fan interest once again and has many fans and
   members of the baseball media calling Rodriguez "a contemporary Mr.
   October."

   "Thank you, A-Rod," said ESPN's Peter Gammons, who left a baseball
   game in Denver between the Boston Red Sox and the Colorado Rockies
   immediately after hearing the news Sunday and flew to Legends Field in
   Tampa to get comments from Yankees front man Hank Steinbrenner. "We
   desperately needed something to get us out of the never-ending
   drudgery that is fall baseball. This is a real treat. "

   The announcement, made during the late innings of what thankfully and
   at long last turned out to be the final game of the 2007 season, came
   as a welcome respite to many. For the past month, baseball fans around
   the nation endured the interminable and repetitive process of
   determining the two league champions, followed by the predictable
   coronation of one overall champion.

   "A-Rod's decision about free agency is what I have been waiting for
   all October," Boston resident Nat Boyle said. "Would A-Rod forfeit the
   remaining $91 million on his contract? Would the Texas Rangers be
   responsible for subsidizing $30 million of his salary? I mean, ever
   since I was a kid, that's what October has been all about."

   Boyle's statement echoed the sentiments of millions and millions of
   fans watching the final baseball game on television, who, following
   Rodriguez's disclosure of his future plans were delighted by endless
   commentary on the situation by Fox's Joe Buck and Tim McCarver.

   According to viewers, both Buck and McCarver thankfully talked for
   inning after exhilarating inning about what team Rodriguez might play
   for next year, what he must have been thinking to walk away from a $30
   million annual salary, and what his decision meant for the future of
   the New York Yankees--a team that was not playing baseball at the time
   of the announcement and is not scheduled to play another professional
   baseball game until April 2008.

   "I was dozing off there in the eighth [inning] right after I think
   some guy hit a home run to bring us within one run of tying," said
   Colorado resident Russ Gamble, who was in attendance at Coors Field at
   the time of the announcement. "But then my buddy nudged me, told me
   the news about A-Rod, and I was like, 'Man, this is fucking
   incredible!' I was literally on the edge of my seat thinking about
   where he might end up in 2008. Cubs? Tigers? Red Sox? Oh man, if I
   were the Red Sox, A-Rod would be my number-one priority."

   Added Gamble: "Someday, I can tell my kid that I was at some baseball
   game when [Rodriguez's agent] Scott Boras sent an e-mail to the
   Associated Press saying that A-Rod had just opted out of the final
   three years on his 10-year, $252 million contract."

   According to other fans in attendance, the entire stadium was "simply
   electric" from the moment of Rodriguez's announcement until the last
   out of the game, at which point many stated they became "extremely
   depressed" upon the realization that Rodriguez had very little chance
   of ending up in a Rockies uniform.

   However, no matter where he eventually plays, Rodriguez's October
   legacy is now assured.

   "Two things you can always bank on in October," ESPN's Baseball
   Tonight host Tim Kurkjian said. "One, baseball is thankfully almost
   over. And two, Alex Rodriguez will always be available to provide the
   fans with the kind of off-field heroics for which he has become so
   famous. Now, his contract belongs to the ages."

