
   WASHINGTON, DC--Departing from his usual hopeful rhetoric during a
   question-and-answer session with reporters in the White House Rose
   Garden, President Bush suggested Tuesday that the war in Iraq has not
   been successful because the nation's armed forces are "just not very
   good."
   [4]Enlarge Image Bush 

   Bush muses candidly about his new idea with the White House press
   corps.

   "When the decision was made to liberate Iraq, I was going on what my
   advisers were telling me and what everyone has said for nearly a
   century--that the U.S. military is the best in the world," Bush said.
   "But if that were the case, and we did have the most powerful army,
   navy, marines, and air force on the globe, we would be winning,
   right?"

   The president admitted that he'd been toying with the idea that a
   thorough lack of quality in personnel, from the top U.S. commander to
   the lowest-ranked private, is the only way to account for the colossal
   failure in Iraq, given that everything on the administrative side of
   the war has been carried out with the utmost care and precision.

   "I know the folks on our end didn't drop the ball," Bush said. "The
   civilian oversight of this war and the plan of attack has been
   brilliant. There's no doubt about that in my mind. Hate to say it, but
   maybe our men and women in uniform just aren't what they're cracked up
   to be."

   Bush conjectured that U.S. servicemen and women thrust into the
   horrifying chaos and violence of Iraq's Sunni Triangle may simply lack
   the proper perspective and cool detachment needed to implement an
   effective strategy against the insurgency. The commander in chief also
   wondered aloud why, for all their vaunted competence, American forces
   become disillusioned while fighting "for such a just and noble cause."
   [5]Enlarge Image Bush 

   Bush lamented the fact that the U.S. is "losing a lot of vehicles and
   equipment" in the ongoing conflict.

   "I know I should support the troops, especially in a time of war, but
   if they can't handle the pressure, maybe they don't deserve my
   support," Bush said. "They're making me look bad."

   "On the occasions I've met our troops, most of them didn't seem like
   they had much going for them," Bush added. "I don't think very many
   went to college or anything."

   Bush said that in the past year he has had much occasion to think
   about the U.S. military's role in history, which, he recently was
   forced to conclude, is "overrated." He traced the roots of the
   misperception back to the nation's victory in World War II.

   "We haven't really flat-out won a war since then, and you have to
   admit even that one was pretty close," the president said.

   Continued Bush: "We pretty much have a 3-4 record in terms of
   important wars, and that's being generous, because I'm counting the
   Civil War as a victory. We got absolutely killed in Vietnam, which was
   another war where the leadership at home did a fine job, only to be
   let down by the troops. Not quite sure what happened in Korea. And I
   thought we won the first Gulf War, but apparently we didn't, because
   we're still there."

   Shortly after the press conference, the White House announced that an
   advisory panel comprised of former officials from both Bush
   administrations and of private military contractors would be formed to
   devise effective solutions to problem areas in the nation's defense,
   namely the quality of the soldiers. Some of the likely recommendations
   include toughening recruitment standards so that not just anyone can
   enlist, and offering swift advancement opportunities for troops who
   show less dependence on the support current forces seem to constantly
   require from the American people. The panel is also expected to
   recommend that the nation enter into additional costly overseas
   conflicts as a way for the military to hone its combat skills.

   Yet even the most optimistic administration estimates acknowledge that
   these transformations are years, if not decades away from being
   implemented. Meanwhile, Bush still appears determined to maintain the
   American military presence in Iraq, telling reporters that the only
   way to improve the armed forces isn't to quit, but to "keep plugging
   away and hope they'll get better at this war business before they all
   get killed."

