
   WASHINGTON, DC--The Department of Homeland Security announced Monday
   that its Counter-Counterterrorism Unit successfully carried out its
   largest and most complex anti-anti-terror exercise to date, destroying
   the Washington Monument in a massive explosion that left 122 dead,
   dozens more injured, and the area around the National Mall a chaotic
   scene of smoke and debris.
   [4]Enlarge Image Washington Monument 

   "We learned from Sept. 11 that we can't just sit back and wait for the
   terrorists to attack us," said DHS Secretary Michael Chertoff at a
   press conference held in front of an on-site triage tent, gesturing to
   the blackened stump of the 122-year-old obelisk as divers pulled
   bodies from the nearby reflecting pool. "We still have a lot of work
   to do, but this operation exceeded our expectations. If we hadn't
   destroyed the Washington Monument today, we would never have known how
   vulnerable it was to attack."

   "Now it can never be destroyed by terrorists," Chertoff added.

   While the counterterrorism unit assigned to protect Washington, D.C.'s
   landmarks was recognized for its "loyal service," Chertoff said the
   counter-counterterrorism team deserved special praise for having had
   "such a profound impact" on the future of American security.

   The CCU was created in 2004 in response to the lack of terror activity
   since the Sept. 11 attacks. Its main tasks include raising awareness
   among the American public of the "myriad unknown threats" that still
   face the country, while also testing the readiness and effectiveness
   of the nation's counterterrorism program by exposing agents to
   real-world scenarios. Last winter, the eight-man
   Counter-Counterterrorism Unit was prevented from blowing up the Statue
   of Liberty and from releasing deadly sarin gas at a Los Angeles Lakers
   basketball game. But sources within DHS said they believed CCU's
   months of planning and reconnaissance paid off in the latest exercise.
   [5]Enlarge Image Suspected Targets 

   The CCU's after-action report showed that the team began the mission
   by convening outside the monument at 10:23 a.m., disguised as
   counterterrorism officers. Commanding officer Commanding Officer Sgt.
   Campbell Payton, who is believed to be the leader of the group, then
   ordered sharpshooters stationed around the perimeter to begin
   eliminating security personnel, and sent a four-man team to choose
   hostages from the terrified tourists at the scene.

   After taking control of the area, Payton tested his counterterrorism
   adversaries by demanding the release of all Guantanamo Bay detainees.
   When U.S. hostage negotiators said they would "see what they could
   do," they were shot dead by accompanying CCU agents for breaking a
   strict DHS policy against negotiating with terrorists.

   "Events like those today prove just how real the threat is--how none
   of us is safe," said acting White House Press Secretary Dana Perino
   during a briefing today. "The White House is looking forward to many
   more exercises of this kindto ensure that we can fully protect
   high-value targets and keep this important work on the minds of the
   American public."
     Michael Chertoff

   "Now [the Washington Monument] can never be destroyed by terrorists."

   DHS Secretary
   Michael Chertoff

   David C. Reynolds, a linguist in the DHS's terrorism prevention task
   force who has an office between the counterterrorism unit and the
   counter-counterterrorism group, said he was shaken by the loss of so
   many close associates.

   "I'll miss having them around," Reynolds said. "I'm mourning the
   friends who died combating and carrying out this momentous act, but at
   least I know their sacrifice was not in vain."

   President Bush, who has already declared a state of emergency in the
   area, is scheduled to tour the wreckage tomorrow. In a statement
   released today, Bush urged Congress to pass a proposed $291 million
   spending package for the counter-counterterrorism program, while
   pointing out "the clear need" to provide the counterterrorism program
   with better training and equipment.

   "By shattering the Washington Monument, the peace of our nation's
   capital, and dozens of people's lives, the dedicated counter-
   counterterrorists have proven just how devastating a determined enemy
   can be," the statement read in part. "These brave men showed those who
   would seek to do us harm and those whose job it is to stop them that
   America is not to be trifled with."

   Special officer Jeremy Stillwell, the only member of the
   counter-counterterrorism unit to survive the exercise, died early
   yesterday morning while being questioned by
   counter-counter-counterterrorism personnel.

