
   WASHINGTON--Citing exhaustion, an overcrowded field of candidates, and
   little hope of making a difference in 2008, roughly 300 million
   Americans announced Tuesday that they will be leaving the presidential
   race behind.
   [4]Enlarge Image Americans Announce They're Dropping Out Of
   Presidential Race 

   The U.S. populace, which has participated in every national election
   since 1789, said that while the decision to abandon next year's race
   was difficult, recent events, such as disappointing victories by both
   Sen. Hillary Clinton (D-NY) and former New York City mayor Rudolph
   Giuliani in regional straw polls, left them with no real choice.

   "We gave it our best shot, and for a while it seemed like the American
   people actually had a chance of coming out on top," Weare, NH resident
   Mark Simmons said at a press conference in front of his suburban home.
   "Unfortunately, as much as we'd like to remain optimistic, it's become
   clear that this just isn't our year."

   Added Simmons: "Maybe you'll see us again in 2012."

   Though initially excited about making universal health care a reality
   and putting an end to the Iraq war, the American people appeared
   visibly worn down after only three months of campaigning. According to
   Beltway observers, idealism among Americans began to fade after the
   first series of major televised debates in August, during which every
   citizen in every state realized they would have to compromise their
   core values in order to remain in the race.

   Factors including intense media coverage of seemingly trivial issues,
   destructive partisan bickering, and the relentless exploitation of
   9/11 only seemed to further discourage Americans from making it to
   Election Day.

   "As the obvious underdogs, we knew that the chance of Americans
   winning in 2008 was slim to none," said Seattle native Paul
   Waverchuck, who claimed he was looking forward to spending more time
   with his family after giving up politics. "I guess there's just no
   room at the table for the vast majority of this country's citizens."
   [5]Enlarge Image Trashed Political Campaign Signs 

   An Ames, IA warehouse bears the brunt of the fallout from Americans'
   decision to leave the presidential race.

   Some pundits predicted months ago that U.S. citizens would lose steam
   before the first round of primaries in January. Unable to endure the
   breakneck pace of morning talk-show interviews and the constant
   coverage and scrutiny of Hillary Clinton's laugh, Americans reportedly
   began to lose focus as early as mid-September.

   A strong October surge in several states by Republican candidate and
   Mormon Mitt Romney made it clear to thousands that it was time to
   throw in the towel.

   "Once Law & Order star Fred Thompson declared his candidacy and Barack
   Obama started using religion to win votes, you could tell America's
   heart wasn't in it anymore," Washington Post correspondent Dan Balz
   said. "They knew it was over for them."

   While not necessarily shocked by the news, some political observers
   have lamented the recent departure of the nation's citizens from the
   2008 elections.

   "American men and women were the only real opposition to frontrunners
   like Clinton and Giuliani," New York Times columnist Maureen Dowd
   said. "They were the only ones who seemed to have the public's best
   interest truly in mind. Without them, it's not going to be much of a
   contest."

   While admitting to being disappointed by the results, Americans said
   they would continue to pursue lasting social change, whether by
   working overtime shifts in order to make education more affordable for
   their children, or by selling some of their belongings in order to
   provide medical coverage for aging family members.

   "Politics are all well and good, but sometimes you have to look for
   solutions outside of Washington if you want to get things done," said
   Henrietta Tanner, a single mother of three from Boise, ID. "Like
   standing in line at the food bank down on Cavendish Avenue, for
   instance."

