
   A settlement in Transdniestria is bad news for Moldova--and the West 

   ITS consequences may be disastrous, but a deal on the worst
   territorial dispute in Europe's poorest country was still too
   tempting. Moldova, sandwiched between Ukraine and Romania, has been
   split ever since a brief civil war in 1992. Its industrialised part--a
   strip of land to the east of the Dniester river--maintains an
   unrecognised independence, propped up by Russia's cheap gas and its
   contingent of "peacekeepers".

   Transdniestria, as it is called, is a black hole. It makes weapons,
   ranging from cheap submachineguns to high-tech missile parts. The
   customers are unknown. It also has lucratively porous borders: one
   common scam is to smuggle American chicken-meat in and out of
   Ukraine's protected home market, at a profit of some EUR700 ($950) per
   tonne.

   Previous attempts to broker a peace deal have got nowhere.
   Transdniestria's rulers have close ties with business-minded
   counterparts in Ukraine, Russia and even in Moldova proper. And Russia
   is unwilling to give up a sliver of its former empire. Last year it
   imposed a punishing embargo on Moldovan wine. But now Moldova is
   shifting its position. Last week President Vladimir Voronin set out a
   new approach that suits the Kremlin--but will dismay Moldova's friends
   in the West.

   In a declaration to be signed jointly with the Transdniestrian leader,
   Igor Smirnov, Moldova will for the first time recognise
   Transdniestria's government and leadership as legitimate entities.
   Voters on both sides will elect a new Moldovan parliament.
   Transdniestria will keep its Supreme Soviet and have top deputy
   ministers in the national government. By 2009 Russia's troops will be
   replaced by unarmed international monitors.

   American and European Union diplomats found out about all this only
   when Vladimir Socor, a Munich-based analyst, published a leaked
   version last week. Now officials in Washington, DC, and Brussels are
   urgently seeking clarification. They hope it is an idea, not a real
   plan, but they fear the worst. Even unencumbered by Transdniestria,
   Moldova's economy has been lacklustre. Of its 4.4m people, at least
   400,000 have emigrated; the country survives on their remittances. A
   dose of Transdniestrian politics is likely only to strengthen all the
   darkest forces in Moldovan public life.

   And what guarantee is there that the deal will stick? "Russia tends to
   take agreements as the basis not for implementation, but for further
   negotiation," says one cross official. The Kremlin has twice ignored
   previous deadlines for withdrawing troops. Suppose that, in a year's
   time, it finds pressing reasons for staying on?

   A third question concerns the Transdniestrian KGB. Closely linked to
   Moscow, it is run by Vladimir Antufeyev, who was involved in a failed
   Soviet crackdown in the Baltic states in 1990. Many think it is he,
   not Mr Smirnov, who runs the show. The Moldovan minister for
   Transdniestria, Vasile Sova, insists Mr Antufeyev and his pals must
   leave. Will they?

   But the biggest puzzle is the timing. Russia's president, Vladimir
   Putin, may have convinced Mr Voronin, a naïve ex-baker, that the
   moment was ripe for a deal. Russia may have wanted a quick fix to
   contrast with the wrangles at the United Nations over the future of
   Kosovo, Serbia's breakaway province. Yet if the Kremlin was in such a
   rush, why was it Moldova that had to make concessions?

   Crony capitalism could be triumphing over other differences. A top
   Moldovan politician's scrap-metal business sells mainly to a steel
   mill in Transdniestria. The son of another has a chain of fast-food
   restaurants that operates in the separatists' capital, Tiraspol. In
   theory, cash from the West should counteract any pull from the east:
   foreign donors have pledged more than $1.2 billion to Moldova in the
   next three years. But much of this depends on reforms that the
   country's lethargic and corrupt administration is loth to embrace.

   It will be hard for outsiders to block the deal; they may not even
   bother to try. If they did, they might be called wreckers, given that
   both sides want it. Yet Mr Voronin's plan means that Russia has, for
   once, trumped the West. Who might be next?

