
   Russia's opposition is feeble, floundering and fading 


   AT A recent gathering of Other Russia, a loose coalition of liberals,
   nationalists and communists who oppose President Vladimir Putin, a
   pro-Kremlin youth group lit candles and played a funeral march. The
   stunt cut close to the bone.

   Russia's opposition may not yet be dead, but it is in a deep coma. The
   Kremlin has hollowed out politics by rigging rules on parties and
   elections. It has made it hard for the opposition to put its case on
   television and sent truncheon-wielding police to dispel protesters.
   But infighting, lack of ideas and above all low public support have
   done as much to hurt the opposition. Just four months before a
   parliamentary election and eight months before the presidential poll,
   it is divided, demoralised and lacks a single candidate. Mr Putin's
   approval rating, meanwhile, stands at a majestic, if
   propaganda-fuelled, 85%.

   Some of Other Russia's key figures, including Mikhail Kasyanov, an
   ex-prime minister, and Vladimir Ryzhkov, an independent member of
   parliament, have left after a split with Garry Kasparov, a former
   world chess champion turned activist, largely because of clashing
   ambitions and trivial rows over procedure. Mr Kasparov and Mr
   Kasyanov, who says he wants to be president, argued for seven hours
   just over how to nominate candidates for parliament and the
   presidency. Their bickering has let down those who have risked
   attending Other Russia protests. "The bear has not yet been killed,
   but they're already trying to divide its skin," says Eduard Limonov,
   leader of the banned National Bolshevik Party (see [4]article).

   The two older liberal parties, Yabloko and the Union of Right Forces
   (SPS), have hardly fared better. For years they have failed to
   combine, though both seek votes from the same sort of people; neither
   passed the 5% threshold for representation at the last parliamentary
   election, four years ago. That threshold has now been raised to 7%;
   the latest polls suggest that neither has a chance of getting over it.
   "I'm not scared of the Kremlin, but when you can't agree among your
   own people, it's time to leave politics," says Irina Khakamada, who
   was a candidate for the presidency in 2004.

   But the truth is that both SPS and Yabloko anyway tend to stay within
   bounds set by the Kremlin. SPS was founded and is funded by Anatoly
   Chubais, who runs Russia's state-backed electricity monopoly. He gets
   on well with Mr Putin and relies on his support for electricity
   reform. SPS is not planning to put up its own challenger for the
   presidency (which the Kremlin's candidate will almost certainly win).
   It is even nervous about putting some of its more outspoken activists
   on its list for the parliamentary elections.

   The problem, however, runs deeper. As Boris Nemtsov, one of the SPS's
   more plausible leaders, says: "There is no real demand for a liberal
   opposition in Russian society." Many Russians still associate liberals
   such as Messrs Nemtsov and Chubais with impoverishment, chaos and loss
   of national pride in the 1990s. As members of Boris Yeltsin's
   government, they talked of macroeconomic stability and fiscal
   discipline but never presented policies that resonated among ordinary
   Russians. Some of their oft-maligned reforms have come to fruition,
   ironically, under Mr Putin: helped by high oil prices, the economy is
   growing around 7% a year, the government budget is in surplus,
   inflation has been tamed and debt paid off.

   Few Russians care enough about freedom of speech or human rights to
   risk their improving lifestyle. "The Kremlin has done a deal with the
   Russian people," says Mr Kasyanov. `"Citizens! Enjoy life, travel
   abroad, buy cars, but don't get involved in politics...If your
   patriotic feelings start to stir, we'll satisfy them.'"

   Indeed, whereas the appetite for liberal ideas is weak, nationalism
   remains strong. The Kremlin has set up parties of every hue to split
   and steal the opposition vote, while squashing any party it cannot
   control--and the nationalist simulacrums have fared worryingly well.
   If anyone breaks through the Kremlin's stranglehold, it is unlikely to
   be the liberals.

