
   After a good summer, Romano Prodi's government faces harder economic
   times

   HAS there ever been a sunnier Italian summer? August was dull, but
   June was radiant and July scorching. September is proving unseasonably
   hot. The sunniness has not been confined to the weather. At first
   blush, good news has been piling up on the desk of Italy's finance
   minister, Tommaso Padoa-Schioppa, ever since he said in June that the
   state of the public accounts was worse than in 1992 (the year Italy
   and Britain were forced out of Europe's exchange-rate mechanism).

   First it became clear that the economy was rebounding faster than
   expected. Last week the Paris-based OECD raised its forecast of
   Italy's 2006 GDP growth from 1.4% to 1.8% (though this is still the
   slowest in Europe). Then the government found that enhanced growth was
   feeding into higher tax revenues. So much so that Romano Prodi, the
   leader of Italy's centre-left government, was able to announce that he
   was jettisoning EUR5 billion ($6.5 billion) of the spending cuts that
   he had planned for 2007. He did not, he said, "want to make Italians
   weep".

   Since then some figures have got better still. Italy's public
   borrowing requirement for the first eight months of the year was
   EUR36.4 billion, some EUR22 billion less than in 2005. Officials are
   now pencilling in a 2006 budget deficit of 3.8-3.9% of GDP. But, in an
   analysis just posted on an Italian economics website,
   [3]www.lavoce.info, two of the country's leading public-finance
   experts, Tito Boeri and Pietro Garibaldi, argue that this is
   pessimistic and that nobody should be surprised "if we end the year
   not far off [the euro-area limit of] 3%". Either way, the picture
   looks far healthier than the 4.6% that is still forecast for next year
   by the OECD (see chart).

   All this seems bizarrely at odds with the growing belief, particularly
   in London, that Italy may risk falling out of the euro. A study being
   published shortly by a London-based think-tank, the Centre for
   European Reform (CER), puts the odds of this happening at a daunting
   40%. Mr Padoa-Schioppa is scathing about such talk. "My time is rather
   short, and I decided not to spend any of it on nonsensical scenarios,"
   he says. "That is a nonsensical scenario."

   Is it? There are, in fact, two variants of it. One envisages Italy's
   public finances deteriorating to the point where its debt loses
   investment grade (which would require only two further downgrades by
   the main rating agencies). That would sharply raise debt-servicing
   costs, pitching the government into a downward spiral of surging
   interest rates and rising deficits.

   The latest data make such an outcome much less likely in the immediate
   future. But there is a danger of the government's falling victim to
   complacency. For the left-wing parties in Mr Prodi's coalition will
   seize on any reports of smaller budget deficits to demand fewer cuts
   in next year's budget. If the world economy were suddenly to turn
   down, which is by no means impossible, the deterioration in Italy's
   public finances could be sudden.

   Italy has not only a substantial budget deficit but, more tellingly,
   the world's third-largest debt. Last year it rose for the first time
   as a percentage of GDP (to around 108%). The primary budget surplus
   (ie, before interest payments) shrank to 0.5% of GDP, down from almost
   5% in 2000. As the CER pamphlet notes, "Italy needs to run a primary
   budget surplus of 2-3% of GDP to prevent the ratio of public debt to
   GDP from rising further." In other words, Mr Padoa-Schioppa's warnings
   earlier this year were objectively true: for all the recent
   improvements, the underlying situation may be worse than in 1992.

   Given that, Mr Prodi's readiness to trim his planned budget cuts has,
   not surprisingly, caused concern. The OECD said it was "disappointed".
   An executive board member of the European Central Bank, Lorenzo Bini
   Smaghi, noted that revenue increases were a "temporary factor which
   may not be repeated". Joaquín Almunia, the European economics
   commissioner, stressed that, for a country whose debts exceed annual
   output, "tidying up public finances is not merely a case of bringing
   the budget deficit down". Seen from Brussels, Italy is increasingly
   the big test of the new (and weaker) stability pact, which is supposed
   to set fiscal rules for euro members. Under it, governments get more
   flexibility in bad times--but they are meant to show greater
   discipline in good times.

   Mr Padoa-Schioppa says that the cabinet agreed to the EUR5 billion
   relaxation because it matched the structural element of this year's
   revenue improvement. As for other budget cuts, he detects "a readiness
   to accept the basic adjustments we propose". However, the biggest
   communist party in government, which has refused to underwrite its
   medium-term economic strategy, is on record as saying that the budget
   plans are "unsustainable". The government is aiming to cut pensions,
   health spending, public-sector employment and local-government
   spending. All of these cuts are unpopular with one or more parties
   within the coalition.

   Yet it is the second variant of Italy leaving the euro that should
   perhaps be more worrying. This envisages the country pulling out
   because its competitiveness erodes to a point where membership becomes
   too painful. Indeed, it is this continuing loss of competitiveness,
   and not its public finances, that may be the biggest economic problem
   facing Italy. The CER study concludes that it is five minutes to
   midnight, and that the Italian government "needs to act now to ensure
   the country's long-term membership of the euro zone".

   Over the past few years Italian competitiveness has deteriorated at an
   alarming rate. Between 2000 and 2004 "total factor productivity" fell
   by an average of 1.2% a year, the worst performance in the EU 15
   countries. At the same time, both inflation and nominal wage growth
   have been higher than in other euro members, especially Germany.

   Mr Padoa-Schioppa sees his main task as "making the economy better fit
   for growth". The growth will depend largely on the efforts of the
   private sector and, to the extent that the public sector can help, on
   further liberalisation by ministries other than his own. But a
   defiantly reforming 2007 budget remains crucial to the country's
   economic prospects. Italy has, in effect, already used up this year's
   unexpected windfall. The government has three years ahead without any
   elections, when it could push through big reforms. If it fails to do
   so because some parties in the coalition resist, the consequences
   could be dire. The warmth of summer can give way to colder weather
   surprisingly quickly.

