
   Let them burn snake oil 



   IN EUROPE, policy packages are like patent remedies: if they promise
   to cure one or two ills, they might be worth a try; if a dozen,
   suspect quackery. On January 23rd the European Commission is to unveil
   a comprehensive energy policy that promises to curb climate change,
   increase energy security, shield economies from volatile fuel prices
   and foster new industries in which Europe will lead the world. The
   mandate for this monster comes from national leaders, who set
   themselves a string of ambitious but sketchy energy goals at a summit
   last March, the European Union's first after growing to 27 members.
   Beforehand, some people wondered how such a diverse group would agree
   about something as tricky as an energy policy. In the event, agreement
   came fast. The reason for that is now clear: like the finest
   snake-oil, the new policy promises something for everyone.

   For countries worried about global warming, there is a target to
   reduce EU greenhouse-gas emissions by at least a fifth of their 1990
   level before 2020. For countries less fussed about climate change
   (some ex-communist newcomers), the policy stresses independence from
   scary suppliers such as Russia, and asks the rich countries of old
   Europe to accept the lion's share of greenhouse-gas curbs.

   Countries with lots of coal will doubtless be gratified by talk of
   clean coal plants, and of carbon capture and storage. Farmers get a
   potentially lucrative pledge that the EU will use biofuels for a tenth
   of its transport needs, as long as they are eco-friendly (fierce rows
   continue about how to judge that). For Europeans opposed to nuclear
   energy (the biggest source of low-carbon energy in the EU), the
   portmanteau places a huge bet on technologies such as wind and wave
   power, setting a target to triple Europe's overall use of renewable
   energies by 2020.

   Countries determined to subsidise expensive forms of greenery (cloudy
   Germany loves solar panels, for some reason) will be allowed to carry
   on. This is sold as a punt on EU innovation, keeping a mix of
   technologies alive while waiting to see which will sell. The model is
   Denmark, which subsidised wind turbines for years and now makes a mint
   exporting them--never mind that wind power itself has to be
   subsidised.

   For fans of market mechanisms, an existing European scheme for trading
   carbon-emissions quotas will be tightened up and a separate trading
   scheme created to set up a market in renewable power certificates
   among EU members. That would allow Britain--a crowded and expensive
   island with strong planning laws--to pay for new wind farms in
   Romania, say. With traded certificates, the power generated by
   Transylvanian windmills would be credited to Britain's renewables
   account, while Romania would get cash and clean electricity.
   Free-traders, in principle, ought to be pleased. Renewables such as
   windmills promote trade and market integration by prodding governments
   to link up national grids, says Peter Brun of the Danish wind-energy
   firm, Vestas. Otherwise, on blustery days you risk swamping your own
   grid, and on calm days going short.

   European officials predict that their policy will redistribute wealth
   to poor neighbours. These may include non-Europeans, as long as
   renewable energy produced by them is imported back to Europe. Thus
   Italy could build solar arrays in north Africa, as long as it laid
   undersea cables to bring back the electricity.

   Europe has "so much to gain", enthuses a Eurocrat: energy security,
   jobs, technological gains, you name it. There will be new industries
   "to replace older industries that will increasingly have trouble
   surviving in a carbon-constrained environment".

   But that is where the clashes start. The French president, Nicolas
   Sarkozy, complains that if EU policies drive heavy polluters to
   countries with laxer carbon regimes, that would be "neither efficient,
   nor fair, nor economically sustainable". To France, it is
   "indispensable" to fight back with import tariffs on goods from
   countries that resist binding curbs on greenhouse emissions (trade
   war, anyone?).

   One minister says it is "stupid" to pin such high hopes on renewable
   energies, because boosting them is not the same thing as cutting
   carbon emissions. If Europeans want to have global impact, he says,
   they should invest heavily in clean coal technology. "There is no way
   you can sort out China with wind power."

   Energy = much confusion, squared

   By far the loudest grumbling, though, is being prompted by specific
   targets that tell each government how big a slice of their energy mix
   must be renewable by 2020. Countries with feeble records on renewable
   energy (such as Britain) will be required to make astonishing leaps:
   in Britain, renewables are supposed to rise sevenfold, from less than
   2% of the energy mix to around 14%. Class swots on renewable energy
   are just as cross, because past efforts have been ignored in setting
   new targets. Sweden, which currently gets about 40% of its energy from
   hydro power and so on, will be asked to find more than half its energy
   from renewables, pushing it into unknown territory at unknown cost.

   For Connie Hedegaard, the Danish climate and energy minister, the
   commission's refusal to acknowledge past efforts is bad politics.
   Europe "should show that sometimes being a front-runner is
   worthwhile". Looking ahead, countries that miss targets should also
   visibly "pay in some way or other". After all, one of Europe's main
   problems, she argues, is that pledges are not kept, and policies are
   never implemented properly.

   That, of course, is the problem with issuing so many pledges. The
   energy package pursues objectives that range, depending on your point
   of view, from the laudable and visionary to the quixotic and crazily
   expensive. The sheer length of the wish-list helped secure a deal last
   spring. But the multiple goals are a muddle. If Europe wants to show
   the world it is serious about climate change, its leaders need to
   agree which objectives really matter. If not, their energy policy may
   be beyond any remedy.

