
   Young layabouts suffer a drought

   A NEW disease is abroad in eastern Germany: Frauenmangel, lack of
   women. In some towns there are only 75 young women for every 100 young
   men. In one or two there are as few as 40. The effects are worrying,
   not only because populations may shrink but also because of the
   existence of a growing underclass of young men who are partnerless,
   underqualified and jobless.

   A study by the Berlin Institute for Population and Development has
   looked at Herzberg and Ebersbach, two small towns in eastern Germany.
   "Even the mayor of Ebersbach hadn't realised this is going on," says
   Reiner Klingholz, the institute's director. It is a vicious spiral.
   Girls are more studious than boys, so they get better qualified and
   migrate west to find both partners and jobs. The boys lack role models
   at home, where fathers are often unemployed, and at school, where
   teachers are mostly female. Young men now account for 65% of German
   high-school dropouts.

   The few women who stay prefer single parenthood to hitching themselves
   to useless partners--benefits for single mothers are generous. It is
   women who are now masters of their destinies. The study, which
   combines reportage with figures, tells of frustrated gangs of youths
   drinking outside supermarkets and sleeping on their loading ramps.

   What can be done? Eastern Germany is now a laboratory for the rest of
   Europe, says Mr Klingholz, since other places are starting to see the
   same phenomenon. Better education is the key. "We have to take the
   risk that the young men will then emigrate too," he says. At least
   they will find jobs more easily. The federal government wants to
   identify two "model regions" where it can spend money on urban renewal
   and health, education and sports facilities. This smacks of too little
   too late--it is 17 years since unification. But it is better than the
   "watering-can" of sprinkling cash everywhere in hopes that something
   grows.

   The despair shows itself in many ways. The death rate among young men
   in Mecklenburg-West Pomerania, in eastern Germany, is twice as high as
   in the west's North-Rhine Westphalia, mainly because of road accidents
   (despite there being fewer cars). And the most fertile ground for the
   extreme-right NPD is now in places with a shortage of women, not high
   unemployment.

