
   The Polish government flails, creaks and sheds ministers


   POLAND'S fractious, pig-headed government has survived for nearly 18
   months, against the expectations of most commentators. Lech and
   Jaroslaw Kaczynski, the identical twins who are respectively president
   and prime minister, may be disastrous in foreign affairs, but at home
   life rumbles on fine. Poland took in a record $14.7 billion in foreign
   investment last year, and the economy is growing at almost 6% a year.

   Money is flowing in from Brussels, thanks to Grazyna Gesicka, the
   diligent regional-affairs minister. The justice system, under a zealot
   named Zbigniew Ziobro, at least sounds serious about catching the
   biggest crooks. Communist-era secret-police files--long a source of
   suspicion and scandal in Poland--are to be opened. The old military
   intelligence service, the WSI, has been closed down, and a dossier
   will be published soon showing the reach of its sinister tentacles in
   business, media and officialdom. The upper reaches of the Kaczynskis'
   Law and Justice party exude a puritanical rectitude. Its two small
   coalition partners, once known for their outlandish populism, have
   been tamed by power.

   In the past two weeks, however, the government has shown signs of
   self-destruction. First to go was Radek Sikorski, the defence
   minister. He resigned because his military counter-intelligence
   service was snooping on him, at the behest of its chief, Antoni
   Macierewicz, a Kaczynski ally. Mr Macierewicz was in charge of
   liquidating the WSI, but has created a private spy service for the
   Kaczynskis in its place. The loss of Mr Sikorski, the only minister
   able to talk sense in English, will merely highlight his
   ex-colleagues' failings.

   Next came the departure of Ludwik Dorn, a deputy prime minister and
   head of the interior ministry. Known as the "third twin" for his
   closeness to the Kaczynskis, the brainy and hard-working Mr Dorn wrote
   a furious open letter to the prime minister, demanding indefinite
   leave (which was granted). The ostensible reason was a clash with Mr
   Ziobro.

   Two senior foreign-policy advisers have also left. The chaos suggests
   that the Kaczynskis' grip may be failing. Anybody wanting to survive
   in the government must be passive, mediocre and loyal, say Poles. One
   Polish weekly has even compared Jaroslaw Kaczynski to Vladimir Putin,
   an insult that is both shocking and a shade absurd. Yet Mr Kaczynski's
   statist, top-down approach and his disregard for the separation of
   powers do ring some faintly alarming bells.

   Even as their enemies become more hysterical, however, the Kaczynskis'
   supporters are untroubled. Law and Justice is polling a steady 28%,
   more than it scored in the election of September 2005. It would be
   rash to write the government off; Jaroslaw Kaczynski has often proved
   a masterly tactician. Some loyalists even suspect that Mr Dorn's
   half-resignation is part of a master-plan. Others think the
   government's troubles are a last-ditch diversion put up by the WSI in
   its death-throes.

   The bigger problem is that, aside from the justice ministry, reform
   has stalled in Poland. Its public administration remains unwieldy,
   incompetent and backward. Having booted the old government's cronies
   out of top jobs in public institutions and state-owned companies, the
   Kaczynskis have installed their own chums, rather than liberalising
   and depoliticising. Privatisation has almost stopped. Public
   purchasing is still deeply corrupt. The Kaczynskis' obsession with the
   wrongs of the past seems to blind them to what is happening under
   their noses.

   In foreign policy, farce is mixed with tragedy. The Kaczynskis have
   missed no opportunity to insult Germany--which under Angela Merkel has
   been trying to be friends. Their conduct of diplomacy is comically
   incompetent. Any advisers who know anything about abroad attract
   mistrust, and often dismissal. Hardly any officials are left who
   understand the European Union, for example, a grave matter with tricky
   negotiations over the EU constitution about to start again.

   Economics attracts similar disdain. The sole goal of economic policy
   was to remove Leszek Balcerowicz, author of Polish free-market reforms
   in the 1990s, from the central bank. Poland's most urgent task is to
   use the boom to cut the budget deficit. Taxes on labour are too high,
   squeezing wages and increasing the incentive to emigrate. A
   million-plus Poles have done just that since Poland joined the EU,
   creating widespread labour shortages.

   Vengeful, paranoid, addicted to crises, divided and mostly
   incompetent, the government survives mainly because the economy is
   strong and the opposition is feeble. Neither will last for ever.

