
   Vladimir Putin did not rig the ballot to win control of parliament,
   but to assert his power over the Kremlin's warring factions

                                                                       AP

                                     AP


   NOTHING was left to chance in Russia's parliamentary election. As
   polling stations closed on December 2nd, large lorries with military
   and riot police surrounded Moscow's main squares. There was no need
   for them: the city was quiet and nobody was protesting. Nor was there
   any need for the "tourist" buses ferrying voters from far-flung
   regions to cast multiple ballots in one polling station after another.
   "We have been going around polling stations since lunch time,"
   grumbled one man, "and they have not paid us yet."

   President Vladimir Putin's United Russia party would have won anyway.
   The victory it secured, 64% of the vote, was in line with the
   predictions of independent opinion polls. Yet the entire machinery of
   the authoritarian state--including courts, prosecutors, media and
   security agencies--was pressed into service to maximise the turnout.
   It was particularly high in Chechnya and Ingushetia--the most troubled
   North Caucasus republics--where 99% of residents voted for United
   Russia. "It is an interesting result," said Dmitry Peskov, a Kremlin
   spokesman, "but we have no reason to doubt it." Many Western leaders
   thought otherwise. The German chancellor, Angela Merkel, said that
   "measured by our standards, it was neither a free, fair nor democratic
   election."

   By putting himself on the United Russia party list, Mr Putin turned
   the election into a referendum on his own popularity--odd, given that
   his rating is already close to 80%. So why so much nervousness and
   what was Mr Putin trying to prove? Plainly, he wants to retain a firm
   grip on power after the expiry of his second term in office (by the
   constitution his last stint) in three months' time. Yet the simplest
   way to achieve this would have been to change the constitution a year
   ago to allow him to stay on. Respect for the law has never been Mr
   Putin's strongest point.

   Indeed, it is widely believed that some, including Igor Sechin, the
   deputy chief of staff in the Kremlin and the informal leader of the
   siloviki, the clan of former KGB men, urged him to make such a change.
   With little prodding, parliament would have amended the constitution
   and two-thirds of the country would have supported it. The West, after
   some grumbling, would have come to terms with it.

   Deciphering Mr Putin's real motives is a murky business, as much a
   matter of psychoanalysis as of political interpretation. It is
   possible that until recently Mr Putin genuinely wanted to leave the
   Kremlin and become an international figure bathing in luxury and
   respect. Staying on might have turned him into a hostage to those
   seeking to protect their financial interests. As one Yeltsin-era
   oligarch put it: "You stay for the third term--you may never leave."

   If so, why the change of heart? The answer almost certainly lies in
   the ever more vicious--and open--rivalry among the Kremlin's political
   clans. Perhaps Mr Putin upset so many rich and powerful people that
   the prospect of losing control over the transition of power may simply
   have been too dangerous for his inner circle, and for himself. For all
   his talk about foreign threats and domestic enemies, what Mr Putin
   really fears is his entourage and a war among the clans. Winston
   Churchill once described the Kremlin's political tussles as being like
   a fight among bulldogs under a carpet: outsiders hear plenty of
   growling but have few clues about the victor's identity until it
   emerges.

   Consider the latest strange noises from beneath the carpet. Two months
   before the election, a fight broke out among Mr Putin's men, resulting
   in the arrest of a general from a drugs-fighting agency accused of
   tapping the phones of the Federal Security Service (FSB). The arrest
   prompted an article from the general's boss, Viktor Cherkesov, one of
   Mr Putin's close allies, warning of the fatal danger of a feud within
   the security agencies, "a war in which there can be no winners".

   A few weeks later, the deputy finance minister, Sergei Storchak, was
   arrested on embezzlement charges. Kremlinologists are confident that
   the arrest was aimed at Alexei Kudrin, the liberal finance minister,
   recently elevated by Mr Putin. Mr Kudrin's plea to see his deputy and
   let him out on bail was ignored.

   Then, just two days before the election, a page-long interview was
   published in a mainstream business newspaper, Kommersant. In it, a
   fund manager, Oleg Shvartsman, claimed that his $3.2 billion fund was
   "closely connected" to the Kremlin's administration and security
   services. He talked of a "velvet reprivatisation" which involved
   "voluntary-coercive" methods. He told Kommersant he reported
   indirectly to Mr Sechin, who also chairs the Rosneft oil company. Mr
   Shvartsman later said his words had been distorted, but the newspaper
   stands by its story.

   Some say the candid interview was aimed at Mr Sechin; others suggest
   it was his own warning "salvo". Either way, it was serious enough for
   the European Bank for Reconstruction and Development to pull out of
   creating a Russian venture-capital fund with Mr Shvartsman. Anatoly
   Chubais, the powerful head of the electricity monopoly, said that
   "intentionally or not, Mr Shvartsman told the truth".

   Caught in his own system, Mr Putin seems to have decided he could not
   rely on any of the factions. All he could do, says Lilia Shevtsova,
   senior associate at the Carnegie Moscow Centre, was to appeal directly
   to the nation. This is why he turned the parliamentary election into a
   display of his own power. It is not the Russian people, or the outside
   world, who needed convincing of his strength, but his own elites.
   Whether they heed Mr Putin will become clear in the next few weeks,
   when he names his chosen successor.

