
    Gomorrah: A Personal Journey into the Violent International Empire of
                                           Naples' Organized Crime System
                        By Roberto Saviano. Translated by Virginia Jewiss
                                                         [0374165270.jpg]
                               Farrar, Straus and Giroux; 320 pages; $25.
                                                        Macmillan; £16.99
                                                                Buy it at
                                                            [3]Amazon.com
                                                          [4]Amazon.co.uk

   CONVENTIONAL wisdom has it that Italy's economy is failing, in part
   because it cannot produce corporations big enough to compete
   internationally. "Gomorrah" is a useful corrective to that view.

   Roberto Saviano demonstrates that the Camorra, the Naples Mafia which
   provides the word-play for his book's title, is doing just fine in the
   globalised economy. Once a web of mobsters whose most international
   activity was smuggling cigarettes, the Camorra eases uninspected
   Chinese goods into Europe and provides loans at usurious rates to the
   sweatshops that produce many of the elegant garments Italy sells
   abroad. It imports arms from eastern Europe and exports them to Basque
   guerrillas. Its various clans launder money through businesses
   scattered from Taiwan to Brno, from Miami Beach, Florida, to Five
   Dock, New South Wales.

   Mr Saviano believes in smelling "the hot breath of reality". By
   getting to the scene of killings before the police have a chance to
   clear away the gore, by riding his scooter for hours round the
   open-air drug supermarket in Secondigliano, even talking to young
   Camorra recruits, he has produced one of the most enthralling and
   disturbing books written on organised crime. He takes his readers to a
   world where teenage gangsters are inducted by being shot at in
   bulletproof vests; where the female bodyguards of a woman mobster wear
   sunglasses and T-shirts of the same yellow as Uma Thurman's outfit in
   the film "Kill Bill". He describes the "submarines"--so-called because
   of their invisibility--who run the Camorra's extensive welfare system.
   And he records a telephone conversation in which two mobsters calmly
   discuss the date for a torture session.

   It is as close to the Camorra as most readers will want to get. By
   going there himself, Mr Saviano has written a book that has so far
   sold 750,000 copies in Italy alone. He has also earned himself death
   threats and a round-the-clock police escort. Like a lot of young
   Italians (he is 28) brought up on an intellectual diet of Catholicism
   and Marxism, he sees liberalism as more of a threat than an
   opportunity. "The logic of criminal business coincides with the most
   aggressive neoliberalism," he claims. But it doesn't. Liberalism
   aspires to free competition; gangsters build cartels.

   Occasionally, too, Mr Saviano's passion can lead him to assertions
   that are more convenient than proven. He claims primacy for the
   Camorra among Italy's five Mafias. Few policemen or prosecutors would
   concur; most believe that the Calabrian version is even more
   dangerous. The author's style is a little rich for easy digestion and
   the translation is over-literal.

   But the great value of "Gomorrah" is to highlight two points: the
   power and wealth that southern Italy's Mafias have accumulated in
   recent years, and the fact that their globalisation makes them an
   issue of concern for us all. His description of the effects of gang
   war on ordinary people ("Women stop wearing high heels--too hard to
   run in them") is masterly. His final chapter, set in the apocalyptic
   wilderness of the Camorra's smouldering waste dumps, is inspired--and
   prescient, as the garbage crisis in Naples unfolds.
   Gomorrah: A Personal Journey into the Violent International Empire of
   Naples' Organized Crime System.
   By Roberto Saviano. Translated by Virginia Jewiss.
   Farrar, Straus and Giroux; 320 pages; $25.
   Macmillan; £16.99

