
   The euro area is not immune to the ills that afflict America and
   Britain




   EARLY in the new year of 2001, Lucas Papademos attended his first
   meeting of the European Central Bank's (ECB) rate-setting council. Mr
   Papademos was there to represent Greece, which had just joined the
   single currency. A day before the meeting, the Federal Reserve had
   lowered its key interest rate by half a percentage point, the first of
   a string of cuts aimed at staving off recession. The ECB declined to
   follow the Fed's lead, deciding to keep its benchmark rate unchanged.

   Seven years on, the ECB enters the new year in an eerily similar
   position. On January 10th its policy meeting will welcome central-bank
   governors from two new members, Cyprus and Malta, which both adopted
   the euro on New Year's Day. Now, as then, inflation of close to 3% is
   the bank's main worry, since it remains fairly upbeat about GDP
   growth. The ECB's economists expect the euro area to grow by 1.5-2.5%
   this year--broadly in line with its potential, in other words, albeit
   with downside risks. Similarly, the bank expected "continuing robust,
   albeit slightly lower growth rates" at the start of 2001, despite
   worries about America's economy.

   The first policy summit of 2008 is very likely to end with a decision
   to keep rates on hold, just as the January 2001 meeting did. Indeed
   the ECB is more minded to lift rates than cut them, judging from
   comments made by Jean-Claude Trichet, its president, following the
   bank's last meeting on December 6th. But if events keep playing out
   just as they did seven years ago, the ECB will be forced into lowering
   rates later this year.

   Much depends on the economy's response to malfunctioning credit
   markets and the gathering economic gloom in America. An optimist would
   argue that the euro zone will prove resilient, because it does not
   have America's legacy of struggling subprime borrowers, its
   current-account deficit or its housing bubble.

   A closer look prompts a less sanguine assessment. Europe has its own
   property hotspots. House-price gains in Spain and Ireland have been
   far greater than in America over the past decade. Both markets are now
   cooling. Even if Ireland's economy is too small to be a big part of
   the ECB's reckoning, Spain does have enough clout to alter the course
   of the euro area. Thomas Meyer at Deutsche Bank reckons that in the
   past five years, Spain accounted for more than one-third of the growth
   in consumer spending, more than half of the increase in investment and
   nearly two-thirds of the job gains of the euro area's big four
   economies.

   The good times may be ending. Spain's boom has been built on a ready
   supply of loans. But the credit squeeze means borrowed funds are now
   harder to come by, which leaves its economy vulnerable. Cooling
   housing markets in France and in Italy are likely to hurt those
   economies too.

   The euro zone also has financial imbalances to contend with. True, its
   current account has been broadly balanced, in contrast with America's
   large and persistent deficits. But that is mostly because Germany's
   current-account surplus, equivalent to 6% of GDP last year according
   to the OECD, has acted as a huge counterweight to deficits elsewhere.

   The high level of saving by German firms contributes to this handsome
   surplus and masks a worrying fault line running through the euro area.
   Outside Germany, companies are heavily dependent on borrowing to
   finance their capital spending, which makes the outlook for investment
   very sensitive to conditions in credit markets. David Owen at Dresdner
   Kleinwort reckons that if Germany is excluded, the corporate sector's
   financing gap (the difference between income and spending) was almost
   6% of GDP last year. That is a bigger funding shortfall than in 2000,
   on the eve of a savage retrenchment by firms that hurt jobs as well as
   investment (see chart).

   Companies' reliance on borrowing is all the more worrying since banks
   play a far bigger role as suppliers of capital in Europe than in
   America. The banks' troubles have not yet crippled the supply of loans
   to companies. Indeed, as Mr Trichet pointed out last month, such
   borrowing rose by 13.9% in the year to October, a rate that "does not
   suggest that we are experiencing a credit crunch". That could be
   premature. Mr Owen thinks the surge in borrowing may reflect firms
   taking up pre-arranged credit lines while they can.

   The euro area may shrug off these ills, particularly if Germany powers
   ahead and consumer spending picks up. Germany's export machine has
   been fuelled by vigorous demand in emerging economies. Moreover, its
   companies can readily finance capital spending from profits. Even so,
   Mr Meyer at Deutsche Bank reckons that the export performance of the
   past two years is "unrepeatable". A strong euro and sluggish growth
   (or worse) in Britain and America, the euro area's two biggest
   markets, mean exports are a less reliable source of demand.

   The lesson of 2001 is that when the outlook for the economy appears
   bad enough, the ECB will cut interest rates, even if inflation is
   stubbornly high. Already, two other inflation-targeting central
   banks--in Britain and Canada--have followed the Fed's lead. If the
   banking crisis persists, the ECB may have to do likewise.

