
   Why it is so hard to convict anybody in Italy

   WHEN the long-awaited corruption trial of Silvio Berlusconi, Italy's
   former prime minister, and his former lawyer, David Mills, the
   estranged husband of Tessa Jowell, a British cabinet minister, opened
   on March 13th, the courtroom in Milan was packed. Eighteen judges,
   lawyers and clerks were there, with a trolley full of dog-eared
   folders and documents. Yet in the four hours of legal argument that
   followed, nobody gave even a hint that what they were all doing was
   essentially futile.

   Because of legislation introduced when Mr Berlusconi was prime
   minister, his trial, plus the two appeals allowed under Italian law,
   have to be completed by next February. Otherwise the case
   automatically lapses under Italy's statute of limitations.

   Giuseppe Gennaro, president of the Italian national magistrates'
   association, says that the entire judicial process takes more than
   eight years on average. It is highly unlikely that the case against Mr
   Berlusconi and Mr Mills will be dispatched in 11 months. Trials in
   Italy do not even take place continuously. In this case, the earliest
   day on which the protagonists could attend a second hearing was March
   22nd, but a lawyers' strike is due to take place that day.

   The trial of Mr Berlusconi and Mr Mills, in which the defendants deny
   giving and receiving a $600,000 bribe, offers an insight into the
   surreal world of Italian justice. For the statute of limitations,
   which makes it almost impossible for prosecutors to convict anybody of
   white-collar crimes, is not the only problem.

   After Mr Berlusconi left office, parliament granted a partial amnesty
   that reduced by three years the sentences for any offences committed
   before the statute came into effect (not just those that had already
   been tried). The government said this measure was necessary to clear
   out the jails; some 26,000 prisoners have since been freed. But for
   the first time since 1948, the amnesty was not accompanied by a pardon
   (extinguishing the offences themselves).

   For untried offences, says Mr Gennaro, "this means that it is
   necessary to hold the trial and at the end, in the event of a guilty
   verdict, pass a sentence that cannot be carried out." Since Italian
   justice moves so slowly, most cases before the courts now concern
   offences committed before the amnesty. A report by a body overseeing
   the judiciary concluded last year that over 90% of trials in the next
   five years could be pointless.

   Prosecutors in Italy are answerable only to their immediate superiors.
   Some have grasped the amnesty as a chance to reduce their backlog of
   work by shelving cases that cannot result in a sentence. Others,
   including the prosecutors in the Berlusconi and Mills case, have taken
   the purist view that they should not pick and choose. "They may feel
   they don't have the authority to decide," says Mr Gennaro, the palms
   of his hands upturned in a gesture of resignation. In any event, Mr
   Berlusconi and Mr Mills are in no real danger of going to jail.

