
   The euro prepares to take in Malta and Cyprus


   "EVER since the 11th century, when the Arabs were ejected, Malta has
   looked to the north," says its central-bank governor, Michael Bonello.
   On July 10th the European Union's smallest member took its biggest
   step north since its entry three years ago. It received approval from
   EU finance ministers to join the euro next January, along with Cyprus,
   taking membership up to 15.

   "For a trading nation like ours, it is one headache less," says Mr
   Bonello. Malta does three-quarters of its trade with the EU.
   Membership of the euro eliminates the cost of swapping into and out of
   a currency used nowhere but a small Mediterranean island. It will help
   tourists from the euro area and the growing number of overseas firms
   drawn by Malta's sunny climate and well-educated, English-speaking
   workforce.

   An even better reason for joining the euro is what Malta had to do to
   qualify. It is a textbook case of the beneficial effects of meeting
   the entry criteria. Three years ago, Malta's public debt was almost
   75% of GDP and its budget deficit nearly 5%. To qualify for
   membership, Lawrence Gonzi's centre-right government imposed austerity
   measures that would have been unthinkable without the lure of euro
   entry.

   British colonial rule, which ended in 1964, left the islanders with a
   large public sector, a generous welfare state and a pervasive
   jobs-for-life, state-will-provide outlook. Yet in recent years the
   workforce at the Valletta docks, once the hub of Malta's economy, has
   been cut by 3,000. The island's loss-making national shipping line has
   been closed, and its telecoms firm and airport privatised. The
   government has frozen public employment and wrung from the unions a
   six-year deal on public-sector wages.

   As the opposition Malta Labour Party (MLP) stresses, the government
   has also had to raise taxes. Alfred Sant, the MLP leader, has been
   iffy about joining the euro, as he was about the EU, and complains
   that "they promised the moon and stars. But it has been a hard slog."
   The ruling Nationalists are five points behind in the polls, and have
   lost every local election for four years. Yet Mr Gonzi is optimistic
   that his reforms will bear fruit before he faces re-election: "We are
   reaping the benefits and I believe people are seeing that." GDP growth
   in the first quarter was a perky 3.5% (at an annual rate). The
   government cut the tax burden in its 2007 budget. Unemployment is the
   lowest in 12 years.

   Still, it is with a rueful smile that Mr Gonzi quotes his Luxembourg
   counterpart, Jean-Claude Juncker: "Every finance minister knows what
   to do. But then no one knows how to win the next election." Malta's is
   due next year.

