
   What the Lisbon and Brussels summits say about today's Europe



   IN THESE carbon-conscious times, there was much carping because
   European Union leaders held a party in Portugal to sign their new
   treaty, only to fly 1,700km (1,060 miles) to Brussels for a formal
   summit the next day. This jet-setting was indeed wasteful, and not
   only in the obvious way. The Lisbon bash on December 13th was both
   interesting and revealing; it was the summit in Brussels that was dull
   and largely devoid of substance.

   Lisbon's revelations included the fact that EU leaders are unsure how
   to treat their union's almost-anthem, the "Ode to Joy". This bit of
   Beethoven's ninth symphony was given formal status in the defunct EU
   constitution only to be ditched, along with the flag and the motto,
   when the text was reworked into a "reform treaty". In Lisbon it took a
   moment for people to recognise the Beethoven being thumped out on a
   piano. But as a choir began singing the "Ode to Joy", most jumped to
   their feet (the Austrian chancellor, Alfred Gusenbauer, showily
   singing along).

   It took an instant longer for some, including Britain's foreign
   secretary, David Miliband, to stand. History can only guess what his
   boss, Gordon Brown, would have done had he made it to the ceremony.
   Alas, Britain's prime minister arrived in Lisbon hours late, after a
   wholly unconvincing diary clash. As a man unimpressed by
   Euro-flummery, he signed the treaty alone at a vast desk, as if acting
   out "splendid isolation" in a diplomatic game of charades. It is
   revealing that his doing so caused a fuss. Within the EU, Mr Brown's
   semi-absence from the stage is now presented as a problem, unbalancing
   the triangle of the union's heavyweights, France, Germany and Britain.

   In Brussels, there is much talk of the awful personal chemistry
   between Germany's chancellor, Angela Merkel, and France's president,
   Nicolas Sarkozy, even if the machinery of Franco-German co-operation
   remains. It would be hard to find two more different personalities,
   suggests one senior figure. Ms Merkel is a calm scientist, attentive
   to detail. Mr Sarkozy is "excitable", and a "pure political animal".
   One European minister says simply: "A lot of European politics at the
   moment is about Sarkozy management. You have all this policy coming
   out in spasms, the idea is to limit the collateral damage."

   European leaders agreed to two things in Brussels. The first was to
   send 1,800 policemen, judges and officials to Kosovo. This matters,
   but not as much as it sounds. The mission was agreed only in principle
   and its legal basis remains unclear. The second was to create a
   "reflection group", which has until June 2010 to think about the
   challenges facing the EU between 2020 and 2030. In case that pace
   seems too breakneck, the group (chaired by a former Spanish prime
   minister, Felipe González, with help from a former Latvian president,
   Vaira Vike-Freiberga, and from Jorma Ollila, a Finnish businessman who
   chairs both Nokia and Royal Dutch Shell) has until the second half of
   next year merely to choose its nine members. That was about it, even
   though the summit conclusions ramble on for many pages--talking of the
   "crucial role" of tourism, asking for a "strategy for the Baltic Sea
   region". The summit lasted less than a day, stunning veterans used to
   coffee-fuelled marathons lasting 36 hours or more.

   Boosters talk up the Lisbon treaty as relaunching the EU after its
   constitutional crisis. Judging by the summit's mood it is more like a
   coalition government that has only just survived a vote of no
   confidence in parliament: everyone is weary and wary of fresh
   divisions, at least until the treaty is safely ratified. The next big
   Euro-row (about allocating targets for cuts in carbon emissions)
   cannot start until next year, when a proposal will be made by the
   European Commission. Subjects that might have triggered squabbles at
   this summit were mostly dealt with beforehand: a funding dispute about
   Galileo, a planned European satellite-navigation system to rival
   America's GPS; another spat about Turkey's membership negotiations.

   The limits to Europe

   Many December summits have featured rows about enlargement. There
   could have been an especially nasty one this time: Mr Sarkozy's
   hostility to Turkish accession is visceral. Indeed, it is the reason
   for the new reflection group. In August Mr Sarkozy made clear that
   France would block any more talks with Turkey unless a group of
   "sages" was invited to ponder the future. Such groups are not actually
   meant to reflect; they usually act as stalking horses for factions
   pushing big innovations, such as the single currency. So Mr Sarkozy's
   colleagues assumed that he wanted the reflection group to define
   Europe's future borders (and to discover that Turkey lies beyond
   them).

   Several governments, backed by the commission, accordingly fought to
   give the group a less alarming brief. Its mandate now makes no mention
   of borders, and it explicitly rules out discussion of the next EU
   budget or further changes to institutions. But efforts to defang the
   beast did not quite succeed: language about studying the stability of
   the EU and "the wider region" will surely allow the group to discuss
   enlargement.

   Fizzing with excitement, Mr Sarkozy insisted that the group would
   "certainly" ask whether the EU needed frontiers, to determine whether
   political union was part of a "new European dream". Yet in a next-door
   room Mr Brown offered a wholly different vision: the group would
   discuss "economic, environmental and security challenges" and
   globalisation. Indeed, Mr Brown's mood visibly lifted as he talked of
   the "exciting" prospect of more EU co-operation with such bodies as
   the IMF. And when he got to the Bank of International Settlements, he
   became positively cheerful.

   The conclusion is clear. EU leaders disagree profoundly about what
   Europe is: a political project, or just an exercise in international
   economic governance. A summit that debated these differences would be
   worth holding. But this summit was not. A more rational EU would have
   simply scrapped it.

