
                                                                      EPA

                                    EPA

   The real test for Ukraine's warring parties will come after this
   weekend's election


   THE stage on Independence Square is set, the props are out, the
   players are ready for the general election on September 30th. There
   are blue tents for the Party of the Regions, led by the prime
   minister, Viktor Yanukovich; orange ones for Our Ukraine, the party of
   his rival, President Viktor Yushchenko; and white tents with red
   hearts for the fiery Yulia Tymoshenko, Mr Yushchenko's first prime
   minister.

   Ukrainians have seen this show several times. This is the second
   parliamentary election since the orange revolution of 2004. The past
   three years have seen lots of side-swapping, corruption and betrayal.
   Much of the president's power has been transferred to parliament. In
   April Mr Yushchenko called a fresh parliamentary election, leaving the
   country largely ungoverned for almost six months.

   The hope is that Ukraine's political system will now be rebooted. Yet
   the results may be similar to the 2006 parliamentary election, when
   the big winner was the Party of the Regions, followed by the
   Tymoshenko block and trailed by Our Ukraine. The real question is not
   over seats: it is whether the political elite can create a functioning
   governing body. And that is also to ask if Ukraine, with no tradition
   of statehood, can be a successful country.

   From this perspective, the importance of this election goes far beyond
   Ukraine. If the biggest ex-Soviet country after Russia can pull itself
   out of this crisis, it will be an example for others, including
   Moldova and Belarus.

   In the 2004 presidential election the picture seemed clear. The orange
   forces, led by Ms Tymoshenko and Mr Yushchenko, defeated the
   vote-rigging Mr Yanukovich, who was backed by Moscow. Ukraine was
   turned to the West. Since then the picture has become blurred.
   Ideological divides, at least between the two Viktors, seem less
   important and the fight for power and money more so.

   As president, Mr Yushchenko failed to break the nexus between politics
   and business and turned a blind eye to the murky brokering of Russian
   gas to Ukraine. The orange revolution did not create the institutions
   needed for a functioning state. Then Mr Yanukovich, the villain in
   2004, staged a dramatic comeback. Unlike Mr Yushchenko, he never
   promised to cut links with business tycoons. He is backed by Rinat
   Akhmetov, an MP and the country's richest man. "We have a different
   philosophy: we want to draw business into the running of the country.
   Akhmetov and Yanukovich complement each other," says Yuriy
   Miroshnychenko, a lawyer with the Party of the Regions.

   Mr Yanukovich has also undergone a makeover by American consultants
   and no longer takes instructions from Moscow. His main message is of
   stability and growth. Demanding official status for the Russian
   language and opposition to NATO membership are secondary. Ms
   Tymoshenko calls for a revolutionary breakthrough and an
   anti-corruption crusade. That inspires awe in her supporters and
   apprehension among some tycoons. All three parties want Ukraine to get
   into the European Union, but the EU offers little encouragement.

   None of the parties will get an overall majority, so a coalition will
   be necessary. One possibility is the reunion of Ms Tymoshenko and Mr
   Yushchenko. Another is a coalition between the Party of the Regions
   and Our Ukraine. Mr Yanukovich and Mr Akhmetov have talked to Mr
   Yushchenko, who has not ruled out a coalition with his opponents. Now
   negotiations are intensifying.

   The test of this election will be the ability of the parties to do a
   post-election deal. Oles Doniy, a supporter of Our Ukraine who fought
   for independence in the early 1990s, says that "from the point of view
   of the Ukrainian state, victory by Our Ukraine is not enough. The most
   important thing is the functioning of the state." For the election to
   be judged a success, he argues, the parties must not cheat; whoever
   loses must recognise the victory of the others; and whoever wins must
   allow the losers to function as a proper opposition.

   Each of the three parties has accused its opponents of rigging the
   votes, even before they are cast. None of the parties is ready to
   admit defeat. If the Party of the Regions wins the most seats but is
   excluded from government, Mr Yanukovich may bring people on to the
   streets; or simply boycott parliament.

   If the economy keeps growing fast, Ukrainians can afford to take
   little interest. But with the world economy faltering, the next few
   years could be tougher. A stalemate that blocks further reform could
   then lose all the gains from 2004.

