
                                                            Peter Schrank

                               Peter Schrank

   Its newest members offer the European Union some history lessons

   JAVIER SOLANA, the European Union's top foreign-policy honcho,
   recently offered a neat turn of phrase to explain the importance that
   Europeans attach to the past. Ponder the phrase "that's history", and
   what it implies on either side of the Atlantic, he suggested. When
   Americans say something is "history", they mean it is no longer
   relevant. When Europeans say the same thing, "they usually mean the
   opposite".

   Is this mere wordplay? If only. History lies at the heart of many
   disputes that are causing such angst in today's EU. Thorny topics
   include Russia's bullying of small Baltic states, fierce rows in such
   countries as Poland and Romania over how far to probe communist-era
   collaboration, not to mention the stand-off between Greeks and Turks
   in Cyprus. Some of these historical quarrels are unfamiliar to western
   Europeans, and they are often highly inconvenient to boot. Small
   wonder that a few longer-established union members are handling the
   arrival of their newer colleagues rather badly.

   The EU used to know where it stood on history--it was best kept
   simple, and in the past. In the early decades, history was about one
   big thing: the second world war, and the grand project of
   Franco-German reconciliation. From the outset, the EU was partly meant
   to make war unthinkable inside Europe. But over the years that miracle
   of continental forgiveness has ossified into something more
   inflexible, even smug. Just as pioneering Eurocrats toiled to create
   single European markets in widgets or wheat, their political masters
   crafted something approaching an approved single European history
   (challenged only in awkward-squad Britain, where the war was a matter
   of national pride). This history portrayed a smooth moral progression
   from nationalism and conflict (bad) to the sunny uplands of
   compromise, dialogue and border-free brotherhood (good).

   Enlargement is now challenging all this--especially the recent
   expansion to 27 countries, including ten former communist ones. The
   clumsy reactions of old EU members are partly to do with ignorance.
   Enlargement has introduced lots of alien grievances, sending old
   Brussels hands scurrying to their encyclopedias to mug up on the 1920
   Treaty of Trianon (hated in Hungary) and Carinthian plebiscite (it
   makes Slovenes fume). But less forgivably, some of the insensitivity
   of older club members carries a whiff of moral superiority, a sense
   that it is un-European (not to mention uncouth) to bear historical
   grudges.

   European politicians have always been quick to use post-war
   reconciliation as a cudgel to pre-empt further debate. This can get
   pretty shameless. Josep Borrell, then president of the European
   Parliament, once dismissed campaigners against the parliament's
   nonsensical monthly trek from Brussels to Strasbourg, because they
   were Swedish: how could Swedes understand that Strasbourg, a much
   fought-over border city, symbolised Franco-German reconciliation, he
   asked. This "historic dimension" was lost on a country that "did not
   participate" in the second world war (though nor did Mr Borrell's--he
   is from Spain).

   Lofty talk of European brotherhood also conceals the fact that, even
   among the founder members of the club, there are deep differences
   about how to reconcile societies with their past. At one end is the
   German model of swift and repeated repentance. Other countries took
   much longer to break with post-war silence and myth-making (France
   springs to mind). Still others moved on from dictatorship to democracy
   via pacts of national amnesia that are only now being challenged
   (think of Spain). It is striking that French politicians have been
   vocal critics of the Polish government over its recent (admittedly
   cack-handed) project to cleanse public life of former collaborators
   (see [3]article). German politicians, with their tradition of
   purgative truth-telling, have been more muted.

   In victory, defeat

   Above all, the authorised version of European history has floundered
   in the face of new members for whom the second world war is not the
   end of any debate, but a starting-point for new rows. The EU now has a
   fistful of ex-communist countries for whom, as one Brussels official
   puts it, "Strasbourg is not a symbol, and 1945 is not a magic year".
   When Polish politicians mention Auschwitz, it is often to complain
   about it being called a "Polish death camp", rather than the wording
   they feel is correct: a Nazi death camp located in Poland. The latest
   row between Estonia and Russia concerns the relocation of a Soviet war
   monument from the centre of Tallinn. Earlier this year, the Baltics
   led an unsuccessful push to add Stalin's crimes to an EU directive
   covering Holocaust denial.

   This is not to say that the newcomers inevitably have right on their
   side. Some nasty anti-Semites lurk within Polish politics. The Baltics
   mis-timed their push for recognition of Stalin's crimes: a directive
   about racism and xenophobia was the wrong vehicle. But that is no
   excuse for the impatient eye-rolling with which newcomers are often
   greeted when they air historical grievances. (During a discussion of
   Estonia's war-memorial row, the German ambassador to the EU observed
   cheerfully that Berlin was still home to Soviet war monuments, and
   even sculptures of Lenin, as if that was comparable.)

   It matters that the EU has a tin ear for some of its members'
   historical memories. It is, at the least, bad manners--not to mention
   bad tactics when dealing with Russian assertiveness. In future,
   history may matter still more, assuming that the union follows
   strategic logic and enlarges once more to take in new members from the
   Balkans (and perhaps Turkey, even if that is a lot further off). These
   are rough neighbourhoods, where history can still get people killed.
   If the EU does not learn to listen to and understand different views
   of the past, it may find itself stumbling when confronting future
   conflicts inside and outside the union. And that would be an historic
   mistake.

