
   There may be an election in September, but it might not solve any
   problems


   FOR a man trapped in a political crisis, Viktor Yushchenko, the
   president of Ukraine, seems calm, almost philosophical. But then
   political crises have become the norm in Ukrainian politics ever since
   he was swept to power after the "orange revolution" in 2004-05.

   One outcome then was a political deal to transfer much presidential
   power to the parliament. That deal lies behind the struggle that
   culminated in Mr Yushchenko's decree in April dissolving parliament
   and calling a fresh election. Mr Yushchenko says he had no choice but
   to act after Viktor Yanukovich, whom he defeated in 2004 but who
   returned as prime minister two years later, had used "bribery and
   pressure" to amass an illegitimately big majority in parliament.
   "[They] thought it would be possible to violate the constitution and
   establish a majority in a non-constitutional way, but that no
   dissolution of parliament would follow. That was a mistake," says Mr
   Yushchenko. The prime minister's camp retort that the president has
   exceeded his powers.

   Both sides appealed to the courts. Legalistic arguments brought them
   to the brink of violence last week after Mr Yushchenko sacked the
   prosecutor-general and tried to consolidate his grip on the security
   services. Mr Yanukovich, who has authority over the police, ordered
   armed commandos to restore order. Yet the tussle between two branches
   of the security services had a sobering effect on both men. "Both
   sides got scared, not even about the consequences of a potentially
   violent clash, but by the very fact that it could take place," says
   Petro Poroshenko, an ally of the president.

   In the small hours of May 27th, Mr Yanukovich and Mr Yushchenko
   declared a truce. They agreed to hold an election on September 30th.
   But this truce was followed by more parliamentary squabbling and
   prevarication. The deadline for agreeing a September election came and
   went, the fate of the prosecutor-general was undecided and the
   interior minister, an ally of Mr Yanukovich, reportedly had a heart
   attack. Even if the election goes ahead in September, it is unlikely
   to change the political constellation in Ukraine enough to resolve the
   country's underlying divisions.

   So far, at least, the political crisis in Ukraine has remained only
   that. The people who three years ago gathered on Kiev's Independence
   Square to support the orange revolution are now, like Mr Yushchenko
   himself, resigned and philosophical about what they regard as a
   political circus. The bigger concern is no longer a violent
   counter-revolution: it is that all the political parties will forfeit
   the trust of their people.

