
   A small European Union country fears it may be swamped by migrants

   NO EVENT has been awaited in Malta with greater eagerness than the
   start of Operation Nautilus II. After a pilot scheme last year, the
   hope was that patrol boats, helicopters and aircraft from all over the
   European Union would converge on the seas between Malta and Libya, to
   keep at bay the tide of migrants surging into the EU's smallest and
   most crowded member.

   Most of the migrants come from the Horn of Africa. They leave Libya on
   overloaded, unseaworthy vessels. A lot die before reaching safety (at
   least 12 bodies were recovered this week). The perils they face, and
   the attitudes of some Maltese, were laid bare last month, when 27
   migrants were found clinging to tuna pens attached to a Maltese-owned
   vessel in international waters. They had been there for three days.
   The owner refused to let them on to his boat, claiming they might
   seize it.

   Yet if there is a solution to this problem, Nautilus II is not likely
   to supply it. Italy is withholding its co-operation. The Italian
   interior minister, Giuliano Amato, argues that the entire exercise is
   pointless unless it involves Libya, which has not even replied to the
   EU's invitation. Frontex, the EU agency in charge of the scheme,
   cannot say if any other country will take part.

   Without Libya's help, Frontex's patrols will be unable to send
   migrants back. Instead, the agency's spokesman says, they will be
   "informed that what they are doing [is] illegal and given
   life-jackets". If their vessel is in distress, they will be rescued
   and taken to the nearest safe place--perhaps Lampedusa or Pantelleria,
   two Italian islands, but often Malta itself. Far from deterring
   migration to the island, Nautilus II could end up making it faster and
   safer.

   Anti-immigrant feeling is running high in Malta. On June 9th a new
   far-right party, Azzjoni Nazzjonali, appeared. The solution of its
   leader, Josie Muscat, is to ship new arrivals "to the edge of our
   territorial waters and say `We're sorry, but this is where our
   responsibility stops'". His views are extreme, but both mainstream
   parties agree that Malta is at bursting-point. "The numbers who came
   to Malta last year are equivalent to half our birth rate," says the
   prime minister, Lawrence Gonzi. "There is no way Malta can absorb
   them." His answer is to get other EU countries to help with the
   repatriation of migrants who are refused refugee or similar status;
   and to share out what he calls the "excess numbers" of those who do.

   What few in Malta acknowledge is that its immigrants are a consequence
   of EU entry three years ago. With few exceptions, those who land in
   Malta want to get to Italy or farther north. Until they joined the EU
   in 2004, the Maltese did little to stop them pursuing their journey
   (often with travel documents valid only in Maltese airspace, issued by
   a Roman Catholic church group). But EU entry stopped that by imposing
   the so-called "Dublin system", which puts responsibility for
   asylum-seekers on the country where they first arrive.

   Malta may be densely populated (three times more than the
   Netherlands), but its immigrant population is still tiny. Officials
   say they have no precise total, but their estimate is below
   3,000--fewer than the commonly touted figure of 7,000 arrivals since
   2002, and less than 1% of the island's 400,000 population. Malta's EU
   partners could be forgiven for feeling that, as in other respects, the
   union's southernmost member is just catching up with them.

