
   The delicate diplomacy over the handling of Kosovo's looming
   independence


   A JOKE has been circulating among diplomats concerned with the
   Balkans. The reply to the question, "what comes after December 10th?"
   is "December 11th." And so it has proved. The 10th was the deadline
   for a mission led by ambassadors from the European Union, America and
   Russia to report to the United Nations on the outcome of negotiations
   between Serbia and its breakaway province of Kosovo. In the event, the
   talks produced so little that the report was handed in early.

   It would be wrong to conclude that nothing has changed after the
   failure of the troika's talks. The end of almost two years of
   diplomatic efforts to find an agreement means that one chapter on
   Kosovo has closed and a new one is opening. A period of turbulence
   lies ahead, and it could even be accompanied by a few spasms of
   violence. But it is almost inconceivable that there will be a general
   return to the Balkan wars of the 1990s.

   Kosovo is the last remaining piece of the former Yugoslav jigsaw. Some
   90% of its 2m people are ethnic Albanians who have long demanded
   independence. Unlike the six countries that have already emerged from
   the old Yugoslavia, Kosovo was not a republic but a province--and one
   with a special historical significance for Serbs. Serbia's present
   leaders have offered maximum autonomy, but Kosovo's Albanians have
   said they will settle for nothing less than independence.

   On December 19th the UN Security Council will take up the question.
   Russia, Serbia's backer, will demand that talks continue. This will be
   rejected by America and the EU countries, who say there is nothing
   left to discuss. At the same time, Western diplomats are working out
   next steps. Serbia is to hold a two-round presidential election in
   January and February. The Kosovo Albanians are being asked to hold off
   declaring independence before then, in a bid to boost the chances of
   the pro-European incumbent, Boris Tadic.

   The diplomats are trying to find a legal cover to replace the UN
   mission in Kosovo with one from the EU. This is proving hard. Kosovo
   is governed by the Security Council's resolution 1244, which says it
   is part of Yugoslavia, to which Serbia is the legal successor state.
   "On this the Serbs and the Russians probably have the law on their
   side," sighs a top European diplomat. "But then this is a political
   decision, not a legal one."

   Once Kosovo declares independence, it is likely to be recognised by
   the Americans, most EU members and many Muslim countries. Serbia may
   try to blockade the new country, apart from the Serb-inhabited part of
   Mitrovica and the north that it already, in effect, runs. So this may
   turn into Europe's newest "frozen conflict". Kosovo exports nothing to
   Serbia, but Serbian exports to Kosovo amount to EUR200m ($280m) a
   year. This trade may be diverted through Montenegro and Macedonia.

   The biggest worry concerns the 50,000 or more Serbs who live in
   enclaves scattered across Kosovo proper. Most, but not all, seem to be
   staying put. If the birth of a new Kosovo is accompanied by violence
   these are the most vulnerable targets.

   As for Serbia, it is at a fork in the road. The EU's leaders may
   soften the blow over Kosovo by waiving a precondition that the country
   co-operate in full with the Yugoslav war-crimes tribunal in The Hague
   before signing a stabilisation and association agreement that would
   bring it large sums of aid. But Vojislav Kostunica, Serbia's prime
   minister, says it is insulting to believe that his country would trade
   Kosovo for eventual EU membership, and even hints that his country
   might refuse to sign the deal. Others close to Mr Tadic retort that
   Serbia has nowhere else to go.

