
   A better way to skin the Kremlin's cat 

   WHEN the rulers of the newly independent Russia surveyed their vast,
   fissiparous territory, there was one uppity Muslim region that worried
   them especially: not Chechnya, but Tatarstan, an oil-rich
   semi-autonomous republic on the Volga. Yet whereas Chechnya has been
   wrecked by war, and umpteen of its leaders have died violently,
   Tatarstan is still governed by Mintimer Shaimiev, the local boss since
   1989.

   Part of the difference is geography: Chechnya is on Russia's fraying
   Caucasian edge, which made it more susceptible to foreign extremism.
   Part is history. The brutal 19th-century conquest of the Caucasus
   created an enmity, wrote Tolstoy, "stronger than hatred, for [the
   Chechens] did not regard those Russian dogs as human beings."
   Tatarstan's capital, Kazan, fell to Ivan the Terrible in 1552--a
   defining moment in Russia's imperial history and imagination. Many
   Tatars, Russia's second-largest ethnic group, have long seen Russia as
   their country too. "This is our motherland," says Gusman Iskhakov,
   Tatarstan's mufti, "and you cannot choose your motherland."

   Still, in the early 1990s, says Mr Shaimiev, probably without
   exaggeration, demands for Tatar sovereignty threatened the integrity
   of the whole Russian federation. But by cannily portraying himself as
   both a champion of Tatar national feeling and a bulwark against it, Mr
   Shaimiev peacefully secured most of the attributes of a state
   (including overseas representation). The Chechens' big mistake, he
   says, was to declare independence outright: "Russia didn't gather
   these lands just to give them away."

   Mr Shaimiev's own rule could almost have been a model for Vladimir
   Putin's. Political competition and critical media have been squeezed.
   But, corruption notwithstanding, the economy is ticking over, as the
   construction cranes that rival the minarets in Kazan's skyline attest.
   With its special talent for blasphemy, the Soviet regime turned many
   of Kazan's mosques into stables and gyms. Now the mosques have
   reopened--and gratitude for the local religious revival seems to trump
   solidarity with Chechnya. "Glory to God that we have Shaimiev!" says
   the leader of an Islamic women's group. Chechen rebels' dreams of
   opening a "Volga front" have withered. Mr Shaimiev has become a useful
   prop in the Kremlin's Arab diplomacy.

   Still, like all regional governors, under Mr Putin's centralising
   reforms he is now subject to the indignity of re-appointment by the
   Kremlin: a temporary change, needed to establish order, Mr Shaimiev
   says tactfully, while also insisting that Tatarstan's right to elect
   its leader has been only suspended. Just as gratingly, a new treaty
   delineating his republic's powers has been held up in Russia's
   parliament (the old agreement, signed in the laissez-faire Yeltsin
   years, has expired). The few remaining nationalists are still hoping
   for a shock; after all, argues one, nobody predicted the end of the
   Soviet Union. More likely, after a fudge, Tatarstan and the eternal Mr
   Shaimiev will carry on much as before.

