
   With French support


   IT TAKES a lot for an Englishman to speak French in public. Yet Tony
   Blair, who has made a habit of it, did it again on January 12th,
   delivering a speech in praise of reform and European unity to members
   of France's centre-right ruling party--all in respectable French.
   Commentators argued that only one prize could explain why the former
   British prime minister (and nominally centre-left politician) put
   himself through the ordeal. At the meeting, President Nicolas Sarkozy
   came close to giving explicit backing to Mr Blair to become the
   European Union's first full-time president.

   Under the new Lisbon treaty, the EU's 27 members will be represented
   by a single figure, serving for two-and-a-half years. That replaces
   the system which sees countries take it in turns to chair EU meetings
   for six months. Hailing his guest as one of Europe's "great men", Mr
   Sarkozy called on Europe to "aim high", and not settle for a
   compromise figure. That certainly sounded like an endorsement, though
   Mr Sarkozy has also praised Jean-Claude Juncker, the chain-smoking
   Luxembourg prime minister, and dark master of the EU's arts.

   Mr Sarkozy hopes the new chief will be chosen late this year, when
   France holds the club's rotating presidency. But that can happen only
   if the treaty is ratified by all 27 members during 2008: a long shot.
   Just as likely, the president will be chosen in a horse-trading
   marathon in 2009, which will also pick a head of the European
   Commission (roughly, the EU's bureaucracy) and a new foreign-policy
   chief.

   Would Mr Blair get the job? Iraq counts against him. So does Britain's
   semi-detached EU status: it remains outside the single currency and
   has multiple opt-outs. Would Mr Blair want the job? Maybe not. A
   tussle looms over who will be the face of the EU abroad, the president
   or foreign-policy chief. If that fight goes the wrong way, the new
   president could languish in Brussels chairing dull summits. More fun
   to tour the world speechifying, in any language.

