
   Slow growth, rising taxes: an unhappy combination for Italians 

   THE Italian language has no word for hangover. Yet the Italian people
   began 2008 with a worse one than most. Just before Christmas they
   learnt that in 2006 they were officially overtaken by Spain in GDP per
   head (see chart), which though not unexpected still came as a shock.
   And there is near-universal conviction among ordinary Italians that
   they personally are poorer than they were 12 months ago.

   Yet the statisticians say otherwise, insisting that Italy's GDP grew
   by 1.8% in 2007, even if it is now slowing again (officials also
   dispute the Spanish superación (surmounting), but that is another
   matter). One explanation can be found in a spacious office in Rome.
   Vincenzo Visco, deputy finance minister in Romano Prodi's centre-left
   government in charge of collecting taxes, had a splendid 2007.
   Government revenues soared by some EUR25 billion ($35 billion), after
   a jump of EUR36 billion in 2006. Part of the rise was due to GDP
   growth; part to measures taken by the previous government of Silvio
   Berlusconi. But an official report to parliament last October
   attributes almost two-fifths of the revenue rise to improved tax
   collection.

   Italians' ability to cling to their earnings and profits is legendary.
   The untaxed (black) economy was reckoned in 2004 to account for a
   sixth of GDP, some 60% above the OECD average. To judge by their
   returns in the same year, Italian lawyers and dentists earned on
   average less than EUR50,000; restaurant owners barely EUR20,000; taxi
   drivers a pitiful EUR11,500. In 2005 only half of Italy's limited
   companies admitted to making any profits at all. Under- and
   non-invoicing to avoid value-added tax (VAT) are common.

   The silver-haired Mr Visco has unleashed a determined campaign to get
   his compatriots to mend their ways. He has stepped up the inspection
   of shops, bars and restaurants; obliged middle-class professionals to
   accept payment by cheque; and curbed the use by firms of offshore
   fiscal havens. He grabbed public attention with an investigation into
   the tax affairs of one of the country's best-known sporting figures,
   Valentino Rossi, a motorcyclist. Most important, he has pushed through
   legislation to allow the finance police and civilian inspectors to
   cross-reference data from different sources, including bank accounts.
   "People now know we know," he says ominously. Last year, it was
   reckoned, more than half the improved tax compliance was "voluntary".

   The effects of Mr Visco's clampdown are evident, even if the cause is
   rarely acknowledged. The cost of eating out has leapt as restaurants
   pass on the full cost of VAT. Lawyers report business deals unwinding
   as people make greater provision for tax. Centre-left politicians fret
   over what the new stringency might do to areas such as Naples, where
   huge swathes of the economy are black. More self-interestedly, they
   worry that much of the opposition's substantial lead in the opinion
   polls may be due to Mr Visco's exactions.

   Well over half of Italy's 40m taxpayers are wage earners and
   pensioners who have their taxes deducted at source. They ought to back
   the new clampdown. Yet many are as hostile as the self-employed and
   employers. This is because, even as it tackles tax evasion, the
   government has increased the overall tax burden. Companies won some
   relief last year with a reduction in corporation tax, but many
   individuals (especially the single and those not owning a home) are
   worse off. Proposals for selective cuts in tax rates have won support
   even from the trade unions.

   Nicola Rossi, a rare liberal in the ruling majority, argues that
   taxpayers are being saddled "to an absolutely unreasonable extent"
   with extra bureaucracy. He wants to see money clawed back from tax
   dodgers spent on cutting tax rates for those who have no option but to
   pay. As it happens, in this he is supported by Mr Visco himself.

   One reason the government finds this hard is made clear in a recent
   study by two economists, Tito Boeri and Pietro Garibaldi. They have
   found that over two-thirds of the extra tax revenues are going towards
   more spending, much of it beyond the control of central government and
   a lot of it used by politicians to dispense patronage and appease
   vested interests. "Until they cut spending, I don't think they'll be
   able to cut taxes," concludes Mr Boeri. Spending has recently been
   rising, "like a train" in Mr Boeri's words, by a steady 2% a year in
   real terms. For the good of the economy, and of the centre-left,
   somebody needs to find the brake soon.

