
   The dangers for a president of trying to do too much


   DURING his election campaign, Nicolas Sarkozy promised a rupture with
   the past. But who could have predicted how fast he would junk the
   well-worn traditions of the presidency? On January 8th, in his first
   full press conference, Mr Sarkozy answered a question about his love
   life (his romance with Carla Bruni was "serious", though he would not
   specify wedding plans). By listing a raft of projects--the abolition
   of advertising on state television, an end to the 35-hour week, an
   obligation on companies to boost profit-sharing--he also displayed his
   micro-management style, without raising an eyebrow. Like it or not,
   hyperprésidentialisation is here to stay.

   In the past, a French president would shape the contours of policy and
   take care of diplomacy and defence, leaving the prime minister to toil
   away at details. The rarity of presidential appearances under François
   Mitterrand and Jacques Chirac dignified the office and sanctified the
   message. Not in Sarkoland. The prime minister, François Fillon, is as
   invisible as his boss is omnipresent--Mr Sarkozy once reportedly
   called him his "assistant". Cabinet ministers are closely supervised
   by advisers at the Elysée. Indeed, Mr Sarkozy sometimes does their
   job: he took over negotiations with the unions on university reform,
   he travelled to Brussels to plead France's case at a finance
   ministers' meeting. Ministers can even be caught short by presidential
   announcements. When Mr Sarkozy said the state would sell another 3% of
   the electricity giant EDF, he took the finance ministry by surprise.
   "Only a very few ministers have real autonomy," says one top official.
   "I've never worked under such a centralised presidency."

   Mr Sarkozy has a taste for plain-talking confrontation and a forceful
   character that may enable him to get deals that others cannot. His
   hyperactive style also fits a strategy to reinvent the presidency and
   break with the stuffy past. "He wants to change the conception of the
   presidency," says an adviser. "To be every day in contact with people
   and their concerns, not just shut up in the palace." Hence a dizzying
   stream of trips, speeches, photo opportunities and meetings with
   ordinary folk.

   Hyperprésidentialisation has its critics. Some fret that Mr Sarkozy is
   undermining the dignity of his office. Even as he has jetted about
   with Ms Bruni, earning from one newspaper the nickname "President
   bling-bling", his ratings have slid. Others complain about the
   concentration of powers. The president, as head of the armed forces
   and with the power to dissolve parliament and change ministers at
   will, is already hugely powerful. Now Mr Sarkozy wants to change the
   constitution to allow the president to address parliament. Laurent
   Joffrin, editor of the left-leaning Libération, this week accused Mr
   Sarkozy of installing "an elective monarchy".

   Yet Mr Sarkozy's planned constitutional reforms include others to make
   parliament a stronger counterweight: rights to oversee presidential
   nominations and authorise long-term military engagements abroad, as
   well as limits on the use of decrees. Nor is Mr Sarkozy the first
   president of the Fifth Republic to treat the office as an executive
   job. Charles de Gaulle, architect of the directly elected presidency,
   once admonished a minister: "Don't refer to the prime minister as the
   head of government. The head of government is me."

   Even so, Mr Sarkozy's approach carries risks. He wants to end the
   "deplorable tradition of...hypocrisy and lies" of past presidents
   about their private lives, but how keen will he be on American-style
   transparency if his romance chills? More important, previous
   presidents have found it handy to dump their prime minister when
   things go wrong. By casting himself in the starring role, Mr Sarkozy
   will have nobody to blame but himself.

