
   The "pro-American" president takes on France's English-speaking
   television

   "GOBSMACKED!" That is how one journalist at France 24, a television
   news channel, described the newsroom's reaction to President Nicolas
   Sarkozy's announcement that the channel should in future broadcast
   only in French. That such a colloquialism--in English--reverberates so
   readily around a French television studio shows how bilingual the
   channel has become in a land known for linguistic chauvinism.

   France 24, jointly owned by the public broadcaster and TF1, a private
   station, was set up just over a year ago as a result of French
   exasperation at American dominance of the airwaves. The French were
   vexed, particularly during the invasion of Iraq, by the cheerleading
   of American networks, and wanted a CNN à la française. From the start,
   it was obvious that to offer a "French perspective" to others, it
   would have to broadcast in languages other than French, just as
   al-Jazeera knew it could not broadcast only in Arabic. France 24 began
   with channels in French and English; an Arabic station followed.

   France 24 can be slow to react to breaking news. It has a small
   budget--EUR80m ($119m) a year--and a relatively sparse network of
   reporters, though it can draw on those of its sister news
   organisations. It has struggled to find distribution channels, notably
   in America. But it has turned out not to be a mere mouthpiece of
   French government. And it has supplied a useful alternative both in
   style (more long debates) and content (more, say, on Lebanese
   politics) to other global news channels.

   So why does Mr Sarkozy want to close down its non-French channels? One
   reason is budgetary: he says he is "not disposed to finance a channel
   that does not speak French". The other is diplomatic. "In order to
   present a French vision," he says, "I would really prefer it to be
   presented in the French language." The French have long considered
   their language to be more than a tool of communication: it is an
   embodiment of culture, identity and independence. To speak to the
   world in another language seems like a gesture of submission.

   For now, France 24's English channel continues to broadcast; managers
   have told reporters they will lobby hard to keep the station alive.
   Bernard Kouchner, the foreign minister, says he does not share his
   boss's view that it is pointless to broadcast in English. For his
   part, Mr Sarkozy has made a point of embracing America, advertising
   his love of Hollywood films, even taking his summer holiday in New
   Hampshire. It would be an irony indeed if the president who promised
   to liquidate French anti-Americanism ended up abolishing France's best
   example of reaching out to the English-speaking world.

