
   The ruling coalition wobbles, but survives for now


   OUTSIDERS often mock Poland's prickly, obstinate prime minister,
   Jaroslaw Kaczynski. But a collapse of his government, followed by
   months of instability, might be worse. An anti-corruption watchdog
   this week named a deputy prime minister, the temperamental farmers'
   leader Andrzej Lepper, in a bribery scandal. Mr Kaczynski promptly
   sacked him (for the second time).

   Mr Lepper, who denies any wrongdoing, threatened to take his party,
   Self-Defence, out of the coalition. That would have meant minority
   rule and perhaps an early election, bogging down Poland's haphazard
   reforms completely. The European Union's most unpredictable member
   would be even harder to handle. But Self-Defence does not want an
   election campaign in which its already pungent reputation for cronyism
   might take centre stage. Fearing a revolt, Mr Lepper apparently backed
   down, suggesting his party may stay in the coalition "conditionally".

   Mr Kaczynski's Law and Justice Party may also want to defuse a row
   with its hardline Catholic supporters before facing voters. Father
   Tadeusz Rydzyk, who runs a highly politicised media empire, recently
   called Mr Kaczynski's sister-in-law a "witch" who deserved
   "euthanasia" because of her support for abortion. That prompted a
   rebuke from her husband, Lech Kaczynski, Jaroslaw's twin brother and
   Poland's president.

   Law and Justice's embrace has proved near-fatal to the other coalition
   party, the nationalist League of Polish Families. It may now do the
   same for Self-Defence. Mr Kaczynski can thus safely go for an early
   election whenever he chooses. But his canny politicking is not matched
   by ability to govern. Attempts at health reform, for example, have
   brought doctors at more than 200 hospitals out on strike. Nurses
   demanding higher wages are camping in tents outside Mr Kaczynski's
   office. They say he has broken election pledges to help losers from
   the post-1989 transition, such as ill-paid public-sector workers.

   The government has also failed to reform public finances, essential if
   Poland is to follow Cyprus and Malta into the euro (see [4]article).
   Its main boasts are reforms in the intelligence services, stronger
   anti-corruption efforts and weeding out communist-era secret-police
   collaborators. These may have been worthwhile, but the government's
   approach has been highly partisan, even vengeful. Public
   administration is lamentably backward.

   As the political system fails to reflect Poles' exasperation with
   their poor quality of life, many are voting with their feet. Some 2m
   have gone abroad since Poland joined the EU, and a recent survey found
   another 3m planning to do the same. This is aggravating labour
   shortages that may undermine the country's competitiveness.

   Poland's foreign policy is also being mismanaged. At the recent EU
   summit, Mr Kaczynski won a delay on new voting rules that will reduce
   Poland's weight. But the victory was marred by his graceless approach,
   using Poland's wartime suffering at German hands as a bargaining chip.
   It was Germany that pushed hardest for Poland's EU entry. Now German
   diplomats in Warsaw say relations cannot improve so long as the
   Kaczynskis are in power.

   On the foreign front, things may get worse still. Law and Justice has
   just suspended its most sensible foreign-affairs expert, Pawel
   Zalewski. A deputy leader of the party, he dared to quiz the
   lightweight foreign minister, Anna Fotyga, at a parliamentary hearing.
   The disconnection between Poland and its EU partners was underlined
   when a Polish candidate to run the IMF was brushed aside. Both Poland
   and the EU would like to see a strong, dependable government in
   Warsaw. It may be some time before they get one.

