
   Only a crisis turns bad banks into bedfellows


   WHEN the smoke clears Deutsche Bank, Germany's biggest, may prove to
   be the agent of change in a long overdue upheaval of the German
   banking system. This week the bank was castigated by Heinrich Haasis,
   head of an association of savings banks. That is because it sold
   sophisticated financial structures, including investments in American
   subprime mortgages, to IKB, a small German lender, and was the first
   to pull the plug, six weeks ago, when IKB got into trouble. Josef
   Ackermann, Deutsche Bank's boss, has little time for such criticism.
   He blamed some German banks for taking on risks beyond their capacity
   and competence.

   Whatever their rights and wrongs, IKB's troubles have triggered a
   crisis of confidence in Germany's publicly owned banks that could
   eventually turn out to have beneficial consequences. Saxony-based
   SachsenLB, one of the smaller wholesale banks, or Landesbanks, was
   caught in the same subprime mess as IKB, rescued by its peers, and
   sold at the end of August. Other Landesbanks appear to have been less
   exposed to America's subprime market, but it is open season on them
   nonetheless. That is because the mess has revealed a far deeper
   problem: their business model is kaput.

   Landesbanks were set up to act as wholesale financiers alongside
   state-owned regional savings banks. With a state guarantee they were
   able to fund themselves cheaply, making their lending profitable. When
   their state guarantee was abolished in 2005, under pressure from
   Brussels, they found it harder to obtain cheap new funding and had to
   scour for higher-yielding assets. Investment banks touting
   mortgage-backed securities from America found a particularly receptive
   audience at SachsenLB. Other banks were also tempted into rough
   waters. WestLB recently confirmed it had lost EUR604m ($824m) in a
   share-trading scandal.

   Now WestLB is for sale, and where management failure has led it, other
   Landesbanks should be urged to follow. The business case for so many
   non-entities cluttering up the German banking system is becoming ever
   harder to sustain. Germany has far too many banks, around 2,200 in
   all, which has a depressing effect on the industry's profitability
   (see chart).

   There are two high hurdles to overcome, however, before the numbers
   can fall. One is political protection. Landesbanks are seen as
   vehicles of prestige and power by the politicians who sit on their
   boards. (Though the finance minister of Saxony, who headed the
   supervisory board of SachsenLB, saw the flipside last week when he was
   forced out of office.) Savings banks, too, are often seen as local
   development banks by their municipal bosses, with little concern for
   profit.

   The other hurdle is the shortage of possible buyers. The savings
   banks, which are protected from private sale by law, do not want to
   merge with Landesbanks nor will they let them go to anyone else.
   Private banks such as Commerzbank and even private-equity firms may be
   interested in WestLB. But when Commerzbank sought to buy Landesbank
   Berlin, the capital's wholesale bank, earlier this year, it was outbid
   by the savings banks association.

   Rather than merging Landesbanks with savings or private banks, the
   public banking sector is seduced by the intoxicating--if daft--idea of
   creating a champion Landesbank, perhaps bigger than Deutsche Bank.
   That, some hope, would have the critical mass to succeed--even
   globally.

   But in fraught markets where it is increasingly difficult to obtain
   wholesale funding, banks benefit from having retail customers to
   provide cheap money in the form of deposits. Only two Landesbanks have
   a retail base: LBBW in Baden-Württemburg and Landesbank Berlin. But
   even LBBW, which stepped in to buy SachsenLB, and is the biggest
   Landesbank, is a pygmy by European standards. Deutsche Bank alone
   among the German banks makes it into Europe's top 20.

   Could Deutsche, too, be on the lookout for opportunities in Germany?
   Mr Ackermann made an astonishing proposal this week, not to buy
   savings banks, but to co-operate with them as their partner for global
   investment banking and wholesale products. It would indeed be sensible
   for Deutsche Bank to focus on building links at home. It has shown it
   can make a difference by hastening the demise of poorly run banks.
   Progress is a permanent process of creative destruction, wrote Mr
   Ackermann recently, borrowing from the economist Joseph Schumpeter.

