
   The star couple at the top of the Socialist Party splits up


   THE public interest stops at the bedroom door. That has long been an
   unspoken rule of French politics. President François Mitterrand kept
   his mistress and their daughter hidden from voters for years. But what
   happens when both halves of a couple are in the public eye? That was
   the dilemma for Ségolène Royal, defeated Socialist presidential
   candidate, whose partner, François Hollande, happens to be the
   Socialist Party's boss.

   This week, in a highly unFrench declaration, Ms Royal confirmed
   rumours that have circulated for some time: she and Mr Hollande have
   separated. "I suggested to François that he should live his life
   separately, and he accepted," she told French radio. "We no longer
   live together." As recently as March, she had written that "yes, we
   are still together and yes, we still live together." Was it all a
   charade? Not at all, she insists: she put her troubles to one side
   during the campaign, to protect the pair's four children.

   The French are torn about the new confessional tendencies of their
   political leaders. Despite the creeping invasion of American-style
   celebrity politics, the media no longer discuss President Nicolas
   Sarkozy's relationship with his wife, Cécilia. This week the news of
   Ms Royal's separation occupied--uncharacteristically--the entire front
   page of Le Parisien, a mid-market daily, on a day otherwise dominated
   by the country's parliamentary elections.

   Have the French embraced what they call the peopleisation of political
   life? In a poll this week, 83% said that Ms Royal's announcement was
   not useful information but "a strictly private affair". Ms Royal's
   decision was motivated less by media pressure to come clean, as might
   have happened in tabloid-laden Britain, than by the need to clarify an
   awkward dynamic at the heart of the Socialist Party--in particular her
   desire to take the top job from Mr Hollande.

   Mr Hollande says he will step down as Socialist leader in 2008. Ms
   Royal plans to stand for the post. Amid the recrimination after her
   presidential defeat, the Socialist Party was growing impatient. "I've
   had enough of political life turning around the life of a couple,"
   said Manuel Valls, a rising star in the party. With the news of the
   pair's split, the air has cleared for the succession battle, and
   private lives are safe again--at least for now. A German media group,
   Axel Springer, has announced that it will launch a French version of
   Bild, its German tabloid, by the end of the year.

