
   Why Christians feel under threat in today's Turkey

                                                                      AFP
                                                                      AFP

   THIS has been a bad year for Orhan Picaklar. As a Protestant
   missionary in Samsun, on the Black Sea, he has had death threats and
   his church has been repeatedly stoned. Local newspapers called him a
   foreign agent. A group of youths tried to kidnap him as he was driving
   home. His pleas for police protection have gone unheeded.

   Mr Picaklar is not alone. All over Turkey, Christians are under
   attack. In January Hrant Dink, an ethnic Armenian newspaper editor,
   was shot dead in Istanbul by a teenager who said he had "insulted
   Turkishness". In April two Turks and a German, all evangelists, were
   murdered in Malatya. Their killers bound and tortured them before
   slitting their throats. In December an Italian Catholic priest was
   knifed by a teenager in Izmir. Another Italian priest was shot dead in
   Trabzon in 2006.

   Many blame the attacks on a new ultra-nationalism, tinged with Islamic
   militancy, that has swept across Turkey. Unemployed teenagers in the
   Black Sea region seem especially prone to it. "The plight of
   Christians is critical," says Husnu Ondul, president of the
   Ankara-based Turkish Human Rights Association. Like many others, he
   believes that the "deep state", comprising a few judges, army officers
   and security officials who need enemies to justify their grip on
   power, is behind the attacks.

   That may seem far-fetched. Yet evidence leaked to the media in the
   Dink and Malatya cases points to collusion between the perpetrators
   and rogue elements in the police and the army. It also suggests that
   the Istanbul police were tipped off about Mr Dink's murder a year
   before it was carried out. "So why did the Istanbul police do nothing
   to prevent it?" wonders Ergin Cinmen, a lawyer for the Dink family.

   Respecting the religious freedom of non-Muslims is essential to
   Turkey's hopes of joining the European Union. Laws against Christians
   repairing their churches have been relaxed. Overriding objections from
   pious constituents, the ruling Justice and Development (AK) party has
   just restored an ancient Armenian church in eastern Turkey. School
   textbooks are being purged of an anti-Western bias.

   Yet many Christian grievances remain. The prime minister, Recep Tayyip
   Erdogan, resists calls to reopen the Greek Orthodox Halki seminary on
   Heybeli island off Istanbul, shut down in 1971. Turkey refuses to
   recognise the ecumenical title of the Greek Orthodox patriarch,
   Bartholomew I, the spiritual leader of over 200m Orthodox Christians.
   The patriarch, a loyal Turkish citizen, has lobbied hard for Turkey's
   EU membership. But this has only reinforced suspicions among
   ultra-nationalist detractors, who accuse him of trying to
   "Christianise" Turkey and wanting a Vatican-style state in the heart
   of Istanbul.

   Never mind that the Greek Orthodox church in Istanbul has dwindled to
   4,000 souls, many of them too old to follow their children abroad. Nor
   that the patriarch must under Turkish law be a Turkish citizen, a rule
   which is making it difficult to find a successor to Bartholomew I.
   "They [ie, the Turks] apparently won't regard the conquest of
   Constantinople as complete until the patriarchate ceases to exist and
   all Christians have been frightened away," suggests one restorer of
   icons in Istanbul.

   The government has yet to approve a draft bill to help non-Muslims
   recover thousands of properties that have been confiscated by the
   state and either sold or left to decay. The Aya Yorgi church in
   Istanbul's Edirnekapi district, which was badly damaged in an
   earthquake, is one sad example. Its walls are cracked, its roof is
   leaking; a marble angel lies in pieces on the floor. "All we ask is to
   be permitted to rescue our church, but we cannot hammer a single
   nail," complains Bishop Dionysios, a Greek Orthodox prelate who still
   conducts services there.

   Many Christians concede that AK has treated them better than its
   secular predecessors did. They blame the deep state for their recent
   troubles. But the excuse of the deep state's power is wearing thin
   after AK's big victory in July's general election. "With such a strong
   mandate, the government's failure to meet our demands can only mean
   one thing, that the deep state is still in charge," says a Christian
   priest. Or perhaps that AK believes in religious freedom for Muslims,
   but not Christians.

