
   The government's crude ways may be worse than the sins it seeks to
   extirpate


   THOSE who predicted that the Polish government would drop the
   dramatics and fade gracefully from view in the run-up to a general
   election next month have been proved spectacularly wrong. A
   cloak-and-dagger operation at the end of August led to the arrests of
   a former interior minister, a former chief of police and the chief
   executive of Poland's largest insurer. They were made, dramatically
   enough, by balaclava-clad special forces.

   The evidence for the arrests suggested that Janusz Kaczmarek, who
   until his dismissal as interior minister in early August was a close
   ally of President Lech Kaczynski, was involved in a leak that led to
   the failure of a sting operation by a state anti-corruption agency.
   The three men have now been released on bail, but Jaromir Netzel,
   chief executive of the PZU insurance company, has been sacked. A
   warrant has been issued for a rich businessmen, Ryszard Krauze, who is
   abroad.

   Many questions remain. One is why the former chief of police, Konrad
   Kornatowski, was detained just before he gave evidence to a
   parliamentary committee. He might yet confirm claims by Mr Kaczmarek
   that political rivals and critical journalists were illegally put
   under surveillance on the orders of the justice minister, Zbigniew
   Ziobro. Another concern is that the office of prosecutor-general is
   part of the justice portfolio. Critics say Mr Ziobro, who is close to
   the prime minister, Jaroslaw Kaczynski, is too partisan for the role.

   There are broader worries about the undermining of judicial
   independence since the Kaczynski brothers' party, Law and Justice,
   took power two years ago. They set up the state anti-corruption
   agency, whose operation to expose the dealings of a coalition partner
   has led to demands for a parliamentary investigation. Roman Giertych,
   leader of another former coalition party, accuses Law and Justice of
   employing "Soviet methods". The prime minister retorts that the
   government has been acting "like a good surgeon" cutting out "diseased
   tissue".

   The Kaczynskis may have been right to try to rid Polish public life of
   post-communist sleaze. But they have failed, so far, to come up with
   evidence for the existence of an all-encompassing network of corrupt
   businesspeople, politicians and communist spooks, the uklad, which
   they say has ruled Poland since 1989. And their methods have sometimes
   smacked more of a witch-hunt than of due process.

   The latest arrests may have had a political motive. The governor's
   insistence that protection of the rich and powerful has ended
   resonates with voters. For the first time in a year, a poll has just
   put Law and Justice ahead of the largest opposition party, the liberal
   Civic Platform. This puts the opposition in an awkward dilemma:
   whether to vote to keep a government it is eager to oust, or to back
   an early election it now risks losing.

   An early election and a change of government still look the most
   likely outcome of all this. But Law and Justice could yet ride back
   into power on a wave of populist support. Democracy in eastern Europe
   remains a learning process. But Poland's ruling party may not prove to
   have been the best of teachers.

