


   The grand coalition's junior partner, the Social Democrats, improve
   their prospects--at the expense of the government's


   KURT BECK has been chairman of the Social Democratic Party (SPD), the
   junior partner in Germany's grand coalition government, since May
   2006. But only now has the party crowned him. Colleagues asked if his
   homespun ways and rustic accent befitted the leader of Germany's
   oldest political party. The SPD's modernising ministers paid him
   little heed. Yet at the party convention in Hamburg between October
   26th and 28th, over 95% of delegates voted to re-elect him. Newspapers
   dubbed him "King Kurt".

   Mr Beck has won the accolade by pulling the SPD out of a tailspin. As
   the party responsible for the unpopular Agenda 2010 reforms of
   Chancellor Gerhard Schröder, and now as part of a coalition with the
   Christian Democratic Union (CDU), which portrays compassionate social
   policies as its own, the SPD has been haemorrhaging members and votes
   for years. Mr Beck has given it a glimpse of redemption by proposing
   to pay unemployment benefits to older workers for a longer period, a
   partial rollback of Agenda 2010. Delegates cheered this rediscovery of
   the party's roots; sceptics held their tongues.

   The party's new friskiness promises to make life uncomfortable for
   Angela Merkel, the CDU chancellor. Getting ahead of Mr Beck, the SPD
   has booby-trapped the planned privatisation of the federal railway,
   Deutsche Bahn, endorsed a speed limit on motorways and (with his
   blessing, this time) called for a minimum wage. Its leaders, having
   made up with each other, are warming up for the federal election in
   2009 by laying into Ms Merkel. Her response will be to try to preserve
   her popularity but fend off pressure for policies she sees as
   economically senseless. This is not a recipe for progress with reform.

   On unemployment benefits she is likely to offer conditional surrender.
   Mr Beck's proposal--to extend the payment period from 12 months to 15
   for jobless people over 45 and to 24 months for those over 50--is
   popular. Tax revenues are buoyant, so the government cannot plead
   poverty. Moreover, the CDU has already endorsed a version of the same
   policy. Ms Merkel wants to contain its cost, which could reach EUR2.9
   billion ($4.2 billion), says the Federal Labour Agency (the SPD
   insists it will cost far less). More money for welfare means less for
   investment and tax cuts, or a smaller financial cushion to soften the
   effects of a slowing economy.

   However it is financed, the government will be weakening one of the
   pillars of Mr Schröder's Agenda 2010 reforms, enacted in 2003-05.
   Offering extended unemployment benefits to older workers discourages
   them from seeking work and promotes early retirement, notes Klaus
   Deutsch of DB Research, part of Deutsche Bank. With the shortening of
   the payment period under Agenda 2010, joblessness has fallen by more
   than average among older workers during the economic upswing. That may
   now change.

   In some other areas, the SPD's new assertiveness may produce gridlock,
   not retreat. Deutsche Bahn, which faces a liberalised European market,
   may not issue voting shares to outside investors, the party has
   decided. That could be fatal to its privatisation. The CDU is likely
   to block an economy-wide minimum wage, which would destroy jobs. What
   does not get through is likely to become the stuff of the 2009
   election campaign.

   Is there any point, people may start to wonder, in prolonging the
   grand coalition until then? The odds are that the partners will say
   yes, for reasons of both policy and politics. The common ground
   between the two parties has shrunk, but it has not quite disappeared.
   There is still room to stimulate employment by cutting payroll taxes,
   one of the CDU's pet projects. The coalition may find a formula for
   reforming the inheritance tax. It is working on a second phase of
   federal reform, limiting states' debts and giving them more
   tax-raising powers. Both big parties have made energy efficiency a
   priority.

   The SPD indulged its political appetites in Hamburg; now its ministers
   will return to the hard grind of governance, predicts Richard Stöss, a
   political scientist at Berlin's Free University. Germans approve of
   grand coalitions, however uncomfortable they are for the politicians
   involved. Whoever pulls the plug prematurely risks being punished by
   the voters, Mr Stöss argues. There is "no question" that the coalition
   will survive until 2009, insists Niels Annen, a member of the SPD's
   left wing.

   But from now onwards the partners' preoccupation will be to seduce as
   broad a swathe of the electorate as they can, which means reaching out
   to the middle as well as cultivating their bases. The notion that the
   SPD has lurched to the left is "outrageous nonsense", says Mr Beck.
   Yes, the party's newly minted basic programme reaffirms democratic
   socialism, but it also endorses "sustainability", of the financial as
   well as the ecological sort. Although the SPD may still want to tweak
   the Agenda 2010 reforms, the basic carrot-and-stick principle behind
   them has not been abandoned, the party insists.

   For now, though, the middle belongs to Ms Merkel. Her approval rating
   is close to 70%. The record of grand coalitions at state level
   suggests that political credit for whatever they achieve goes mainly
   to their senior partners. To oust Ms Merkel from the chancellorship in
   the next election, the SPD would have to win almost 40% of the vote.
   Despite the Beck revival, it is still far from achieving that.

   The main risk to Ms Merkel is that she could lapse into irrelevance.
   Until now she has prospered by showing strength in foreign policy and
   deftness in managing the coalition's internal divisions. If they now
   start to paralyse the government, or drive it in the direction set by
   the SPD, she will lose her image as a leader capable of rising above
   political adversity. "She has to be with the people, but not with the
   SPD," says Wolfgang Nowak of the Alfred Herrhausen Society, a group
   linked to Deutsche Bank. The best opportunity to strike back at its
   rejuvenated rival may come next month, when the CDU holds its own
   convention in Hanover.

