
   The new Polish government may find it hard to deliver on its promises

   SUSPICION and confrontation were the hallmarks of Poland's previous
   government. The new centre-right Civic Platform marks a big change.
   Attacks on the government by Law and Justice, the former ruling party
   led by Jaroslaw Kaczynski, have been met with quiet steel. Civic
   Platform's amicable negotiations with its junior partner, the
   Peasants' Party, contrast with Mr Kaczynski's suspension of three
   colleagues for advocating more open discussion in his party.

   The new prime minister, Donald Tusk, is mild-mannered but not overly
   meek. His competent cabinet includes two Poles with strong foreign
   links. Jacek Rostowski, a graduate of the London School of Economics,
   is finance minister. Radek Sikorski, an Oxford graduate who worked at
   the American Enterprise Institute before serving as defence minister
   in Mr Kaczynski's government and then defecting to Civic Platform, is
   foreign minister. The Peasants' Party leader, Waldemar Pawlak, an
   internet enthusiast, will be deputy prime minister. His party is more
   amenable than the extreme populist junior partners in Mr Kaczynski's
   coalition.

   Mr Rostowski faces the biggest challenge: keeping the economy on
   track, if it falters in 2008 after growing by 6.5% this year.
   Public-finance reform is pressing; so are wage demands by teachers and
   health-care workers, stoked by labour shortages. It may be easier for
   Mr Sikorski to patch up relations with Poland's neighbours and
   European partners, bruised by the previous government's eccentric
   diplomacy. But the new government is more dubious about America's
   planned missile-defence system.

   Meeting voters' inflated expectations on road-building, housing and
   rural development will be hard. So will dealing with the boisterously
   disruptive tactics of Law and Justice, which raised so many procedural
   objections that it forced the first post-election session of
   parliament into recess. It is now boycotting the intelligence
   committee in an argument over its composition.

   But the deepest problem may be the relationship between Mr Tusk and
   President Lech Kaczynski, twin brother of Jaroslaw. The president has
   made clear that he considers Mr Tusk a second-best choice, blaming a
   hostile media for depriving his brother of a second term. The
   constitution obliges the heads of state and government to co-operate
   closely, particularly on foreign policy and defence. It seems that the
   president is determined to use all the means at his disposal to
   promote his own vision of domestic and foreign policy.

   Poland's new government has catching up to do after the past two
   years. It will also need some luck. Its many well-wishers abroad can
   only hope it gets it.

