
   A brave tale of journalists who sacked their editor

                                                    Editors in danger too

   IF THE editor mangles this article, his correspondent can do little
   but fume. That would not be true at Der Spiegel ("The Mirror"),
   Germany's leading newsweekly, where the staff are in control. They
   have just abruptly dethroned their long-serving editor, Stefan Aust.

   Mr Aust had made Spiegel shine. He was hired in 1994 to strike back
   against Focus, a colourful upstart, which he managed by livening up
   the magazine's appearance, grooming its prose and publishing more
   provocative covers. Spiegel now leads the newsweekly pack, selling 1m
   copies and having lost fewer readers than either Focus or Stern.
   Spiegel television, which Mr Aust once ran, is thriving; the Spiegel
   [3]website (which is not his patch) has crushed all rivals. The
   magazine has lost political clout, but it still reaches the elite,
   says Henning Kornfeld of the Kress Report, which studies the media.
   Financially, 2007 was the Spiegel group's best year ever.

   Founded in 1947, even before the Federal Republic of Germany's
   official birth, Der Spiegel made its name by tormenting the Adenauer
   government, promoting dialogue with the communist east and dredging up
   scandals. In 1950 the Bundestag even convened a special committee to
   deal with its allegations that parliamentarians were bribed to choose
   Bonn as Germany's capital. Rudolf Augstein, the founding editor, gave
   Spiegel's staff half the company's shares in 1974.

   Mr Aust's detractors think he has betrayed the Augstein legacy. To
   fight off Focus, they say, he made Spiegel less political and more
   superficial. Rather than crusading from the left, Spiegel launched
   tirades from the right, especially against the Social Democrat-led
   government of Gerhard Schröder in 1998-2005. "The fish rots from the
   head," complained Augstein's daughter, Franziska, in 2005. Worse, Mr
   Aust was rude to his staff. They have retaliated by ending his tenure
   early, in 2008 rather than 2010. One insider sees this as a last spasm
   of rebellion by ageing "'68ers".

   With Mr Aust gone, Spiegel can mesh its print and online personalities
   and launch more products bearing its brand, believe his executioners,
   who were joined by the publisher, Gruner+Jahr, owner of a 25% stake.
   But will any forceful personality be ready to put himself at the mercy
   of colleagues who have just turfed out an editor as successful as Mr
   Aust? The answer may become clear only when a new editor is picked,
   perhaps later this month.

