
                                                                       AP

                                     AP

   Romano Prodi's centre-left coalition is back in office, but its
   chances of lasting for long are not great

   BY THE time the Senate, parliament's upper house, voted on the future
   of Romano Prodi's government on February 28th, he seemed like a figure
   from a computer game, pressing on relentlessly although blown up and
   with the way ahead strewn with traps and ambushes. In the event his
   centre-left government survived by 162 votes to 157, giving it two
   more votes than the 160 it needed. But few Italians (barely a fifth,
   said a poll in Corriere della Sera) expect it to see out its five-year
   term.

   The government was plunged into crisis when it failed to muster an
   outright majority in the Senate for its foreign policy. Mr Prodi duly
   resigned, but after consultations with political leaders President
   Giorgio Napolitano sent him back to parliament to seek endorsements
   from both chambers. The Senate is the one that matters: in the lower
   house, the government has a comfortable majority.

   To onlookers, the whole exercise may seem futile: just another example
   of the histrionic politicking that distracts Italy's leaders and helps
   to explain why the country finds it so difficult to reform. The
   episode had real effects, even so.

   Most obviously, it shattered Mr Prodi's blithe optimism that he could
   survive indefinitely without a proper working majority in the upper
   house. After the defection last September of one centre-left senator,
   he had the same number of elected senators in the upper house as the
   opposition leader, Silvio Berlusconi. He could pass legislation thanks
   only to the leftish sympathies of most of Italy's seven (unelected)
   life senators. Sooner or later, he was bound to be tripped up on an
   issue of conscience.

   In fact it was two senators from the radical left who mutinied over
   Italy's military presence in Afghanistan; two life senators
   unexpectedly abstained. One was a veteran Christian Democratic prime
   minister, Giulio Andreotti, whose decision may have reflected Vatican
   distaste for a bill to give legal rights to unmarried couples,
   including gays.

   Another effect of the drama was to highlight the need for a new
   electoral law to replace the system of proportional representation
   that was imposed by Mr Berlusconi's government shortly before it was
   ousted in April 2006. At the time critics said the new system was
   meant to make Italy ungovernable by creating the stalemate in the
   Senate that it duly produced. This week Mr Prodi said a new electoral
   law was an "absolute priority". Domenico Siniscalco, who was briefly
   finance minister under Mr Berlusconi, thinks that Italy cannot be
   reformed without a new electoral system to weaken the blackmailing
   power of small parties. But Mr Berlusconi has said this is a "false
   problem"- and smaller parties will also resist any change.

   The brief crisis has shocked the centre-left into unity, at least for
   now. On February 22nd, leaders of the nine parties in Mr Prodi's
   coalition issued a list of 12 "non-negotiable" points. They included
   respect for Italy's international commitments and undertakings to
   press ahead with two controversial plans--a high-speed rail link with
   France and a programme of liberalisation. The list was notable for
   omitting rights for unwed couples.

   As well as pleasing Mr Andreotti, that made easier one more change:
   the defection of a centre-right senator, Marco Follini, one of two
   opposition rebels. Although a former leader of the conservative Union
   of Christian Democrats (UDC) and briefly a deputy prime minister under
   Mr Berlusconi, he had been disrupting the centre-right with his dream
   of a coalition of the centre as the only solution to Italy's problems.
   Mr Follini's departure has prompted speculation of a wider, maybe
   Vatican-inspired, move to give the government support from the UDC, or
   at least from some of its legislators.

   Mr Prodi's speech to the Senate showed that he is alive to this
   possibility. One commentator called it a "formidable example of
   Christian Democrat oratory". He managed not to make any reference to
   the law on unmarried couples. He hinted at better pensions for the
   worst-off, lower taxes for home-owners and restrictions on short-term
   employment, all policies that would please the UDC.

   Whatever else they may achieve, though, Mr Prodi's overtures to the
   right may not improve the chances of further liberalisation in Italy.
   Mr Follini himself may sympathise with the liberal cause, but lots of
   his former colleagues are diehard corporatists who, like him, get most
   of their votes from the south, where many households depend either on
   welfare or on public-sector employment.

   Besides, although an influx of conservative Christian Democrats would
   make the governing majority bigger, it would also make it more
   discordant. The UDC stretches a long way from the centre. Its members
   include Rocco Buttiglione, whose reactionary views on gays and single
   mothers cost him a seat in the European Commission in 2004.

   Even for the present centre-left coalition, the way ahead looks
   testing. It could easily split if, for example, the government
   abandons the unwed-couples bill. Parliament has yet to approve renewed
   funding for Italy's contingent in Afghanistan and as many as three
   senators could abstain on that. And the coalition might also rip
   itself apart over pensions, the next test of its ability to reform.

   Proposals leaked this week showed that the government was preparing to
   retreat from a pension reform introduced by the Berlusconi
   administration. This responded to Italy's escalating welfare bill and
   to a central problem of its economy, which is that too few older
   people are actively employed. The reform, due to take effect next
   year, would have stopped workers from retiring before the age of 60.
   The new plan will allow them to go at 58.

   Yet instead of welcoming this backsliding from reform, union leaders
   expressed outrage over another idea: to ensure that pension costs are
   not increased inexorably by rising life expectancy. A link between
   pensionable age and life expectancy was due to have been made two
   years ago in line with a law passed in 1995. One union leader has now
   proposed a general strike to stop it. Poor Italy.

