
                                                                  Reuters

                                  Reuters

   A modest electoral setback for Nicolas Sarkozy will not derail his
   reform plans


   PRESIDENT Nicolas Sarkozy headed to the European Union summit this
   week with a bit less of the usual spring in his step. Barely a month
   after taking office, he has suffered his first political set-back. In
   the second round of the French legislative election on June 17th, he
   won a smaller majority than had been predicted.

   Mr Sarkozy's UMP party took 313 of the 577 seats in the National
   Assembly, down from 357 in 2002. Even with the 22 seats of his new
   centrist allies, this falls short of the 400-plus landslide the polls
   had forecast. The biggest upset was the defeat of Alain Juppé, ecology
   minister and number two in the new government, who promptly resigned.
   The Socialist Party and its close allies boosted their tally from 149
   to 212 seats. As expected, smaller parties were crushed. François
   Bayrou's new MoDem party got three seats and Jean-Marie Le Pen's
   National Front none at all. Only the Communists managed a more
   honourable 15 seats.

   The surprise result was due in part to a bungled message from the
   government of François Fillon, Mr Sarkozy's prime minister, over plans
   to finance cuts in payroll taxes by an increase in VAT. The Socialists
   managed successfully to spin this as an "unfair" 5% price hike. At the
   same time, voters have sent a broader message of caution to their new
   president: yes, we back you and your reforms, but we want some
   countervailing force too. The Fifth Republic makes the presidency
   extremely powerful. And unlike most predecessors, the hyper-energetic
   Mr Sarkozy seems to want to put his fingers into all kinds of domestic
   dossiers, from schools to ecology.

   Might the results hamper Mr Sarkozy's reform plans? Besides prompting
   a rethink over how soon it may implement its VAT plans, the answer is
   no, for three reasons. First, Mr Sarkozy still controls 60% of
   parliamentary seats. This is only the fourth time under the Fifth
   Republic that a single party has won an absolute majority. It is also
   the first time since 1978 that a ruling party has been re-elected.

   Second, Mr Sarkozy still has a strong mandate. Arguing that a
   president needs an explicit mandate to bring about genuine reform, he
   spelled out in his campaign exactly what he intended to do. Voters
   have now backed those plans four times in less than two months.

   Third, Mr Sarkozy's strategy is to create a broad-based consensus for
   reform via an unusually inclusive government. The 12 junior ministers
   he appointed this week confirm this. He has brought in Rama Yade, a
   black (female) politician, as a junior foreign minister for human
   rights. He has chosen Fadela Amara, a campaigner against violence
   towards women in the banlieues, who is of North African origin, to
   work on cities. And he has added Jean-Marie Bockel, a rare Blairite
   Socialist, to his collection of left-leaning ministers.

   Mr Sarkozy has also consolidated his team of economic liberals by
   putting Christine Lagarde in the finance ministry. She is the first
   woman ever to hold such a job in a G7 country. Briefly farm minister,
   Ms Lagarde is a former global head of Baker & McKenzie, a
   Chicago-based law firm, and, partly thanks to her familiarity with
   "Anglo-Saxon" business culture, is a popular face for France abroad.
   She replaces Jean-Louis Borloo, who moves to ecology after Mr Juppé's
   resignation. Hervé Novelli, a former lieutenant of the liberal Alain
   Madelin, goes to trade.

   In a speech to his freshly elected deputies this week, Mr Sarkozy
   argued the case for pressing ahead fast, declaring: "Everything I've
   promised to change, I will change." Already, four draft laws are in
   the works. They will go to an extraordinary session of parliament in
   July, a time when deputies are usually packing their holiday bags. One
   will tighten sentences for young repeat offenders. Another will give
   sclerotic universities more autonomy. A third obliges unions to start
   negotiations over the guarantee of minimum service on public transport
   even during strikes; Mr Sarkozy has given unions and transport bosses
   until September to reach a deal.

   The fourth is a EUR11 billion ($15 billion) fiscal package, aimed at
   cutting taxes on labour and companies, to encourage job-creation and
   discourage outsourcing, and to persuade the French to spend more time
   at work and less on welfare. One plan is to exonerate from social
   charges and income tax all time worked over the 35-hour week. Another
   is a new "tax shield" to cap at 50% of income any household's overall
   tax burden. But a few ideas are driven more by political than economic
   logic, such as a new tax break on mortgage-interest payments, which
   may simply inflate house prices, and cuts in inheritance tax.

   Mr Fillon insists that he will finance these measures by reducing the
   civil-service headcount and introducing small charges for health care.
   He has promised to replace only one in two retiring bureaucrats, and
   to merge overlapping departments. It will be a tough task. The public
   finances are already strained, and Ms Lagarde, who will ultimately
   control spending, is not an elected politician. "I find it hard to
   believe that the whole package will be financed by spending cuts,"
   says Eric Chaney, chief European economist at Morgan Stanley. He
   reckons the result will be a net fiscal stimulus of 0.3% of GDP in
   2008, and he has raised his budget-deficit forecast from 2.7% to 2.9%
   of GDP.

   Despite the Socialists' extra seats, opposition in parliament will be
   weak, partly because the party has to sort out its leadership (see
   [4]article). But that may not be true of the streets. The unions fear
   that the right to strike will be undermined by the minimum-service
   plan. Some universities fret about the creation of a two-tier system.
   In July, employers and unions will begin tough six-month negotiations
   over labour-law reform, including simplification of job contracts, a
   tightening up of unemployment benefit, and the opening up of union
   representation beyond the big five.

   It adds up to an ambitious agenda, but it is also one that France
   cannot afford to fail. Nicolas Baverez, an economic commentator who is
   close to Mr Sarkozy, puts it darkly: "This is the last chance France
   has to carry out reform peacefully."

