
   The election campaign in Turkey begins in a febrile atmosphere


   UNTIL a few weeks ago, Mehmet Simsek, a British-educated economist,
   earned a six-figure salary as a banker in London. But he has dropped
   all that to run as a parliamentary candidate for the ruling AK Party
   in Gaziantep, which borders Syria. He is standing "because I want to
   serve my country," he says.

   Born into grinding poverty in Batman, a mainly Kurdish town, Mr Simsek
   did not speak Turkish until he was six. Yet he then clawed his way to
   success. He is the poster boy of the 150 new candidates whom the prime
   minister, Recep Tayyip Erdogan, is fielding in the July 22nd election.
   His presence thins out the religious firebrands within the mildly
   Islamist AK ranks.

   Turkey's meddlesome generals are not impressed. Having hinted at a
   possible coup in late April, they remain eager to stop Mr Erdogan
   returning to power alone. Indeed, in some ways, the contest is now
   between AK and the army. "The military hates AK, and that's the
   foundation of everything," says one Western diplomat. But opinion
   polls suggest that Mr Erdogan's party may do better than the 34% it
   took in the 2002 election.

   The secularist opposition is fragmented. A planned merger of the
   conservative True Path Party with the centre-right Motherland Party
   collapsed amid bickering over numbers of candidates from each side. A
   survey commissioned by AK suggests that the main secularist CHP
   opposition party may get 22%; and the ultra-nationalist MHP, 11%.

   At least 30 candidates from the pro-Kurdish DTP are also expected to
   win seats; the Kurds have fielded 40 independents to get round the
   minimum 10% threshold for parties to have parliamentary
   representation. No other party is likely to get in, so AK might well
   be able again to form a government alone, says a top party official.
   "That is, if the elections take place at all," he adds gloomily.

   Yet Armagan Kuloglu, a retired air-force general, insists that, as
   long as AK picks a "reasonable" presidential candidate (meaning one
   whose wife does not wear an Islamic headscarf) to replace Ahmet Necdet
   Sezer, things will return to normal. It was Mr Erdogan's nomination of
   his foreign minister, Abdullah Gul (whose wife wears the headscarf) to
   succeed Mr Sezer that prompted the generals' threat to intervene on
   April 27th. A defiant AK responded by ramming through a law to allow a
   direct election of the president. This law was quashed by Mr Sezer.
   Few believe it will get past the constitutional court, which
   extraordinarily ruled invalid parliament's attempt to elect Mr Gul.

   Some even fear that the court may now be tempted to launch proceedings
   to ban AK on the grounds that it is steering Turkey towards religious
   rule. For the time being, though, the opposition's strategy is to play
   on mounting public fury in the face of stepped-up PKK rebel attacks
   that have claimed the lives of dozens of Turkish soldiers in recent
   months.

   On June 8th the army exhorted the Turkish public to exert its "popular
   reflexes" to counter terrorist threats. The call posted on the general
   staff website was seen by some as an invitation to attack the Kurds.
   This forced the generals to explain that they wanted the national
   resolve to be expressed through strictly peaceful means.

   Meanwhile, Mr Erdogan is resisting pressure to order a cross-border
   operation against PKK bases in northern Iraq. This has enabled his
   critics to portray him as an American stooge. Crowds at the recent
   spate of funerals of Turkish soldiers killed in battle have taken to
   booing Mr Erdogan and any cabinet members who dare to show up. Mr
   Simsek may soon be yearning for his cushy London life again.

