
   The election in September is necessary but may not be sufficient to
   clear up Ukraine's messy politics 

   "SORRY we are closed: everybody has gone to the barricades," read the
   note pinned to the door of a travel agency in Lvov, western Ukraine,
   in November 2004. Irina Mala, the manager and part-owner, remembers
   how she gathered warm clothes for her husband and sent him off to
   Kiev, "not knowing whether he would ever come back". For several days
   she clung to the television news, watching people like her husband
   make history in Kiev's Independence Square. "For the first time in my
   life, I felt proud for Ukraine."

   The euphoria of the "orange revolution" is long gone. In the past six
   months, Ms Mala has not even watched the news or read newspapers. The
   power struggle that ensued when Viktor Yushchenko won the presidency
   in December 2004 after weeks of popular protests made her first angry,
   then disappointed and now indifferent. Ms Mala may not even vote in
   the general election on September 30th. "We can't explain to our
   children what is going on," she says. The charges and counter-charges
   are mind-boggling, the nexus between business and politics that Mr
   Yushchenko pledged to break as strong as ever and the switching of
   political sides is like a comic opera, not a revolutionary drama.

   The plot, so far, goes like this. Mr Yushchenko came to power on a
   promise to clean up Ukrainian politics. His defeated rival, Viktor
   Yanukovich, was disgraced because, as prime minister, he had blatantly
   tried to rig the presidential election. Yulia Tymoshenko, a firebrand
   politician in the orange revolution, became Mr Yushchenko's first
   prime minister. But within months, the orange coalition descended into
   turmoil. Ms Tymoshenko's threats to reopen privatisation deals and her
   price caps on fuel and other commodities damaged the economy. Fierce
   internal rows, plus a swathe of corruption scandals, led to the
   dismissal of the government.

   It was thus not a surprise that Mr Yanukovich's Party of the Regions
   took the biggest share of the vote in the parliamentary election in
   early 2006. After more months of infighting on the orange side, Mr
   Yanukovich bounced back as prime minister. Under a compromise in the
   orange revolution, many presidential powers had been transferred to
   parliament. Once he was in the driving seat, Mr Yanukovich began to
   encroach even more.

   According to Mr Yushchenko, the Party of the Regions bribed and
   pressured opposition members of parliament to switch sides so as to
   gain an illegitimately big majority that would let Mr Yanukovich
   change the constitution. Mr Yushchenko accuses the party of trying to
   alter the result of the election and insists that the right response
   was to call a new election. His opponents say this was an illegal
   move. Both sides have cited the constitution (full of loopholes) and
   appealed to the courts (notoriously corrupt). The stand-off almost
   ended violently, but both Viktors have pulled back and agreed to a
   fresh parliamentary election on September 30th.

   Enter Oleksandr Moroz, a renegade socialist and speaker of the
   parliament who is still trying to unravel the deal. Mr Moroz's party
   was once part of the orange coalition. But he betrayed his voters and
   his political allies by joining Mr Yanukovich's camp. The September
   election threatens to get rid of him and his party.

   Few ordinary Ukrainians care about the politicians' squabbling, partly
   because they are used to a state of political crisis and partly
   because they can afford to be bored. After a brief dip under Ms
   Tymoshenko, the economy is doing well, with GDP growing by over 7% a
   year, and incomes are rising. The sharp hike in gas prices charged by
   the Russians has trimmed the pre-2005 double-digit growth, but has
   also led to greater energy efficiency. "The increase in gas prices has
   been very helpful," insists Viktor Pinchuk, a steel magnate who has
   invested $600m in modernising his plant.

   Ukraine's political crisis has had little economic impact. Indeed, one
   reason the economy is doing well, say some, is that politicians are
   too busy fighting each other to meddle. There is also a consensus on
   policy. "Neither Yushchenko nor Yanukovich want to review the results
   of the privatisations, nor build state capitalism," says Oleksandr
   Paskhaver, a former economic adviser to Mr Yushchenko.

   There are, indeed, few ideological divides between the main parties.
   Short-hand labels of Mr Yushchenko as pro-Western and Mr Yanukovich as
   pro-Russian are misleading. "Both politicians are pro-Ukrainian," says
   Petro Oliynyk, governor of Lvov. Both Mr Yanukovich and Mr Yushchenko
   want Ukraine to integrate with Europe, to join the World Trade
   Organisation and to stay friendly with Russia. Mr Yanukovich no longer
   flies to Moscow for advice: these days he is coached by American
   spin-doctors.

   To be sure, there are deep cultural, historical and economic
   differences between the east and the south of Ukraine, which supports
   Mr Yanukovich, and the pro-Yushchenko west (with Ms Tymoshenko's
   support coming from the middle). Only 38% of western Ukrainians have
   been to the east of the country and 35% of easterners to the west,
   says one poll. The east, part of the Russian empire for centuries, is
   largely Orthodox and Russian-speaking. Donetsk, Mr Yanukovich's
   hometown, was the industrial heartland of the Soviet Union. By
   contrast western Ukraine was ruled, as Galicia, first by Poland and
   then by Austria-Hungary, joining the Soviet Union only in 1945. It is
   partly Catholic and mostly Ukrainian-speaking.

   Yet these differences between east and west, exploited by politicians
   on both sides, have not turned into separatism or even hatred. One
   thing all parts of the country agree on is that they want a united,
   independent Ukraine. For all the talk of a pro-Russian mood in the
   east, none of the Russian oligarchs has been allowed to gain control
   of its industrial assets. "Yanukovich is an excellent manager and he
   knows full well that economically the east needs Europe more than the
   west of Ukraine," says Alexander Krivoruchko, a businessman in
   Donetsk.

   The real differences between Mr Yanukovich and Mr Yushchenko lie in
   their values, style of governance and the economic interests they
   stand for. Behind Mr Yanukovich lurk powerful billionaire oligarchs
   who control most of the former Soviet mines and giant steelworks in
   the east. They need markets in Europe, cheap gas from Russia and
   political connections. Mr Yanukovich's critics say that, despite an
   attempt at a makeover, he still bears the marks left by the
   criminalised post-Soviet era. To him, they claim, European integration
   is a way of gaining new markets rather than of installing democratic
   values. But Mr Yanukovich also appeals to eastern Ukrainians who see
   him as a paternal post-Soviet figure who will ensure stable pensions
   and salaries and won't bother with empty promises of a new way of
   life.

   For his part, Mr Yushchenko sees it as his mission to transform a
   post-Soviet country into a democratic European one. Despite
   allegations of corruption in his entourage, most of Mr Yushchenko's
   support comes from millionaires who need clear rules and independent
   courts to enforce contracts. Since there are no giant industrial
   employers in western Ukraine, private initiative is the only way
   forward. "During the orange revolution, we did not fight for Mr
   Yushchenko, we fought against lawlessness," claims Ms Mala.
   Lawlessness and bureaucratic tyranny are still associated with Mr
   Yanukovich, as prime minister before November 2004. "My business was
   under constant pressure from bureaucrats and administrators who all
   demanded bribes," says Ms Mala.

   The election on September 30th is unlikely to change the balance of
   power in the Ukrainian parliament. Even Mr Yushchenko recognises this:
   "I don't question who will lose and who will win in this election."
   But it may still help to lay down rules to prevent a similar crisis
   unfolding again. None of the three main parties is likely to win a
   majority on its own, so a broad coalition between Mr Yushchenko's Our
   Ukraine and Mr Yanukovich's Party of the Regions, which may not
   include the Tymoshenko Block, appears likely. "We are almost done with
   intrigues, unfair agreements, plots and murky games," Ms Tymoshenko
   wrote in a recent article. For Ukraine's 48m people, "almost" is not
   good enough.

