
   Bavaria's Christian Social Union prepares for a post-Stoiber future


   FEW people have described Bavarian politics so aptly as a comedian,
   Gerhard Polt, who once said "In Bavaria we don't need an opposition,
   we already have a democracy!" That message may resonate with Edmund
   Stoiber, who is being ousted not by his opposition but by his own
   party, the conservative Christian Social Union. This may seem
   surprising, because Mr Stoiber, the longstanding premier of Bavaria
   and CSU leader, has been a success, as has his state. The party itself
   is better known for loyalty than rebelliousness.

   The roots of Mr Stoiber's demise lie in his greatest triumph. In 2003,
   a year after he narrowly lost the federal chancellorship to Gerhard
   Schröder, the CSU won an unprecedented two-thirds majority in
   Bavaria's parliament. Critics in the party complain that this went to
   Mr Stoiber's head, as he ignored party bigwigs to push through hurried
   financial and school reforms. Many rejoiced when he left for Berlin to
   join Angela Merkel's grand coalition in late 2005; they fretted the
   more when, in a last-minute huff, he opted out and returned to
   Bavaria. A simmering discontent boiled over in January after Mr
   Stoiber was caught up in a snooping scandal. Two senior CSU ministers,
   Günther Beckstein and Erwin Huber, struck a mutinous deal: Mr
   Beckstein would be Bavaria's premier and Mr Huber would lead the
   party.

   Now their plan is coming to fruition. Mr Huber faces two rival
   candidates at the CSU congress in late September, but the smart money
   is on his becoming party leader. Mr Beckstein is to be installed as
   premier soon afterwards. Yet the pair might make an awkward double
   act, with each acting as the other's boss: one in the party and the
   other in government. This two-hatted leadership may raise doubts about
   who is really in charge.

   Optimists point to the party's historic strength. Founded in 1946 as a
   more inclusive heir to the Bavarian People's Party, the CSU operates
   only in that state (by mutual agreement, Ms Merkel's Christian
   Democratic Union stands in the rest of Germany, but not in Bavaria).
   It has strong links to Bavaria's elite, and its grassroots reach into
   the deepest Alpine valleys. Long experience has enabled the party to
   recruit young talent, helping it to stay in unbroken sole charge of
   Bavaria for 45 years.

   The feuding over the leadership has encouraged tussles at grassroots
   level as well. Local elections next March will be a trial for the
   party. The bigger test will be Bavaria's state election in a year's
   time. Opinion polls today still put the CSU at around 56%. Yet that is
   almost five points down on 2003; and if a few more votes jump to the
   Freie Wähler, another conservative regional party, it could clear the
   5% hurdle to get into parliament. It is conceivable, if still
   unlikely, that this could threaten the CSU's absolute majority.

   The party is also seeing its influence in Berlin wane. German
   unification reduced Bavaria's share of Bundestag seats from 18% to
   13%. In Ms Merkel's grand coalition the CSU seems an inconspicuous
   junior partner, with only two ministries--fewer than in any previous
   CDU-led government. Its two ministers are lightweight, unlike such
   previous stalwarts as Franz Josef Strauss and Theo Waigel. The CSU's
   lost clout may be more obvious under Mr Huber, who spurned a chance to
   head Ms Merkel's chancellery in 2005.

   Yet the CSU remains formidably strong in Bavaria. If its plan
   succeeds, the party will consolidate its power next year before
   Germany's federal election in 2009, after which Mr Huber may go to
   Berlin as finance minister. But if it loses any more ground, Bavarians
   may one day find that they have an opposition after all.

