
   The man who would scare Vladimir Putin 


   "PLEASE ring me later," says Eduard Limonov. "I'm baby-sitting." This
   hardly fits his image as the rabid dog of Russian politics, who has
   been a punk, a scandalous novelist, an extreme leftist and founder of
   the now banned National Bolshevik Party. One of the few opposition
   leaders who can summon an angry crowd, he is a contradictory figure.
   His party's flag has echoes of both fascism and Nazism: a black hammer
   and sickle on a red background.

   Mr Limonov nowadays wants an alliance of right and left. "This isn't
   the time to argue about ideology," he says. "We must work together to
   restore basic freedoms." A leading light in Other Russia, a coalition
   that includes liberals and nationalists, Mr Limonov once allied
   himself with skinheads and rock musicians as well as
   ultra-nationalists. "Our party has had so many programmes," he shrugs,
   "I really wouldn't pay much attention to them."

   After emigrating to the United States in 1974 Mr Limonov, now 64,
   became notorious for a profanity-strewn novel describing the louche
   life of an émigré in New York. With the end of the Soviet Union, he
   returned to Russia in 1991 as an extreme nationalist, lamenting the
   loss of the Soviet empire. He campaigned for the Serbs in the Bosnian
   war. His activists occupied the Ukrainian navy's headquarters in
   Sebastopol, in the Crimea, declaring it a Russian city. In the name of
   Latvia's ethnic Russians, he supported activists who took over a
   church in Riga. A few years ago his followers invaded the ministry of
   health in Moscow and tossed Mr Putin's portrait out of the window.

   Mr Putin and his allies have espoused many of the same causes. "They
   took up our themes and are trying to imitate them," says Mr Limonov.
   But his party was banned; he served two years in prison for an alleged
   plot to get a Russian-dominated part of neighbouring Kazakhstan to
   secede. Many of his comrades are still behind bars.

   Most of his disciples are youngsters fired up by his revolutionary
   zeal. "Old-fashioned" parties such as the Communists or Yabloko are
   dying, he says, and the feebleness of their opposition has let Mr
   Putin's friends grab the Kremlin. "At least we are doing something."

