
   A lesson in how to make friends and influence people 

   UNTIL the change of government this autumn, it would have been
   unimaginable: a Polish prime minister paying a friendly call on the
   German chancellor, Angela Merkel, and speaking to her not only in her
   own language, but even using the intimate Du form. After months in the
   diplomatic deep freeze, Polish foreign policy has thawed. The biggest
   change has come with Germany, which brokered Poland's entry into the
   European Union and ought to be its strongest ally. Ms Merkel has known
   Poland's prime minister, Donald Tusk, for years. At their recent
   meeting the two leaders eased most of the tensions that were to the
   fore under Mr Tusk's predecessor, Jaroslaw Kaczynski.

   The substantive issues are unchanged. Germany wants to build a centre
   to mark the fate of millions deported after the war from historically
   German lands in eastern Europe. Many of their old homes are in Poland.
   But rather than volubly objecting to the plan, which is backed by a
   vocal émigré lobby in Germany, Mr Tusk blandly defused the row. "There
   should be no taboo subjects. We are friends, and friends can't get
   themselves into a situation of not talking to one another," he
   insisted. Poland is hoping for German support for its own historical
   project, a second world war museum in Gdansk. The new Polish foreign
   minister, Radek Sikorski, also favours a museum of totalitarianism in
   Brussels, to put the monstrous regimes of the 20th century on the
   equal footing that many in eastern Europe believe is right.

   Germany is going ahead with a pipeline to bring gas directly from
   Russia under the Baltic Sea, bypassing eastern Europe. Poland has
   voiced objections to this in the past, though Mr Sikorski now insists
   that he never likened it directly to the Molotov-Ribbentrop pact, a
   comparison the Germans find both hysterical and offensive. Poland
   plans its own gas pipeline, from Norway via Denmark. Germany may
   support it and repeat its offer of a share for Poland in the
   Russo-German project.

   To its east, Poland is being a lot nicer to the Kremlin. It has
   dropped the previous government's objection to Russia's bid to join
   the OECD, a rich-country club. That opposition attracted no support
   from other countries, who prefer to bog Russia down in detailed
   scrutiny of its compliance with OECD rules on corruption,
   protectionism, statistics and money-laundering. In return, Russia has
   dropped its long-standing ban on Polish meat exports.

   Yet the timing of the Polish move was odd. It came in the run-up to
   the controversial parliamentary election in Russia, at a point when a
   leading Kremlin critic, Garry Kasparov, had just been jailed. Some top
   Poles agree that this was regrettable. Mr Sikorski has had a friendly
   meeting with his Russian counterpart, Sergei Lavrov, in which they
   agreed to revive a commission to look at "difficult issues". That
   contrasts with the previous government's fondness for searching out
   the thorniest bits of history and raising them as acerbically and
   often as it could.

   All this should go down well elsewhere. "Poland will be a great asset;
   before, she was a liability," beams one European diplomat. The
   neighbourhood offers much scope for constructive diplomacy. The Polish
   government has paid for a leading ex-dissident, Adam Michnik, to go to
   Georgia to advise the government on how best to restore media freedom.
   But the ties to watch may be with another big neighbour, Sweden, whose
   foreign minister, the tough-talking and wily Carl Bildt, is on the
   lookout for heavyweight allies. Poland--the biggest of the EU's new
   members--could prove to be just that.

