
   Controversy over a law to avert conflicts of interest 

   IT IS an issue that has bedevilled Italian politics for over a decade:
   what to do about Silvio Berlusconi's twin roles as politician and
   media mogul? The former prime minister and his family control a huge
   media empire that includes a publisher, two newspapers and all three
   of Italy's biggest private television networks. When he was in power
   in 1994, and again in 2001-06, he was able to influence the three
   state-owned channels as well--giving him direct influence over 90% of
   Italian terrestrial television.

   This week a parliamentary committee began discussing a bill, tabled by
   the whip of the biggest group in Romano Prodi's centre-left
   government, that would tackle such conflicts of interest. The boss of
   Silvio Berlusconi's TV empire, Mediaset, likened it to the
   stringing-up of Benito Mussolini by communist partisans. But what
   eventually emerges will be far less drastic.

   As it stands the bill would create a special watchdog authority. It
   would force politicians with non-property assets of more than EUR10m
   ($13m) to hand them over to a "blind trust", and require similar
   arrangements for all assets owned by office-holders in the energy,
   defence and media businesses. Such a law would replace one approved by
   parliament in 2004 (when Mr Berlusconi was in power) that was widely
   lambasted as toothless.

   The Prodi government has said it will amend the bill. Its final shape
   will depend on painful and difficult compromises both within the
   governing coalition and, quite possibly, between government and
   opposition. Most leftist politicians regard their failure to curb Mr
   Berlusconi's media power before he returned to office in 2001 as an
   historic error. But, with a majority of only two seats in the Senate,
   they could yet find themselves dependent on the centre-right to pass
   the new law.

   There are also wide differences over how broadly it should be drawn.
   The Italy of Values party, a small outfit led by a former prosecutor,
   Antonio Di Pietro, who spent the heyday of his career trying to send
   Mr Berlusconi to jail, wants a tough, radical measure. But some fear
   that voters would react against what might look like a crude reprisal
   against the former prime minister. Earlier this month Mr Prodi's
   communications minister said that an answer might be found that "in no
   way touches Silvio Berlusconi in person". For the sake of Italian
   democracy, something a bit bolder should at least be tried.

