
   The president tries to face down protests from the opposition


   IT WAS exactly four years ago that Mikheil Saakashvili, then a
   youthful firebrand leader of the opposition to President Eduard
   Shevardnadze, brought his supporters out into the streets of Tbilisi.
   The protesters were complaining that Mr Shevardnadze had staged and
   won a rigged parliamentary election. The demonstrations were peaceful
   but, because they went on day after day, also intimidating. Within
   days, Georgia's "rose revolution" had driven Mr Shevardnadze out of
   power and installed Mr Saakashvili in his place.

                                                                       AP
                                                                       AP

                                   While we were marching through Georgia

   Four years on it is Mr Saakashvili who has been confronted by the
   biggest protests since the rose revolution. The most recent ones, in
   central Tbilisi and in front of the parliament building, have
   attracted crowds at least 50,000 strong. The protesters object to Mr
   Saakashvili's forceful, hands-on style, complain that the benefits of
   the boom (annual GDP growth is close to 10%) have been too narrowly
   shared, and demand fresh elections.

   Yet unlike Mr Shevardnadze four years ago, Mr Saakashvili seems
   determined to hang on. He claims the demonstrations are part of a
   Kremlin-backed putsch against him. "High-ranking officials in Russian
   special services are behind this," he said, adding that several
   Russian diplomats would be expelled. Georgia's ambassador to Moscow
   has been recalled.

   Certainly Russia has systematically provoked Georgia, with trade and
   energy sanctions, harassment of Georgian migrants in Russia, and--most
   recently--mysterious air raids. But Mr Saakashvili's response will do
   little to help his country's reputation as a shop window for the West
   in the former Soviet Union.

   On November 7th police forcefully dispersed the protesters, using
   tear-gas and water cannon. Scores of people were reported injured.
   Among those beaten was Georgia's human-rights ombudsman, Sozar Subari.
   The government then declared a 15-day state of emergency. Riot police
   stormed the main opposition television station, Imedi, and took it off
   the air.

   Countries that normally support Georgia against Russian bullying are
   aghast. Many have been worried privately for some time about cronyism
   in Mr Saakashvili's inner circle. Last month the secretary-general of
   NATO, Jaap de Hoop Scheffer, underlined the need for greater political
   transparency and a stricter rule of law if Georgia wants to progress
   towards membership. Outsiders worry that state influence on the media
   is too strong. Many think that the government mishandled a spectacular
   bust-up last month with the firebrand former defence minister, Irakli
   Okruashvili, now in exile.

   Yet the opposition's stance can sound hysterical and sometimes
   outlandish (hanging the president in effigy and demanding the
   restoration of the monarchy after a 200-year interregnum). Given the
   shambles that Mr Saakashvili took over in 2003, the obstacles he has
   faced and the progress he has made, criticisms of him may seem harsh.
   The opposition's motives are open to question too. Badri
   Patarkatsishvili, a tycoon who fled from Russia, openly bankrolls some
   of the protesters, no doubt for admirable reasons. That raises
   questions about the influence of big money in poor countries'
   politics. An adviser to Mr Saakashvili says those backing the
   opposition want Georgia to be a weak state that big business can
   manipulate.

   Western countries will be urging Mr Saakashvili to return political
   life to normal as soon as possible. If he cannot produce proof of
   Russian involvement, many will feel that he has cried wolf, using his
   country's geopolitical significance for narrow domestic advantage.
   Ketevan Tsikhelashvili, a Tbilisi-based analyst, comments that Mr
   Saakashvili and his government have survived, but adds that "in the
   longer term I cannot say his perspectives look very good." At the very
   least this week's events have shown how disillusioned many Georgians
   now are with Mr Saakashvili's commitment to the rose revolution's
   ideals: freedom, legality and international respectability.

