
                                                            Peter Schrank

                               Peter Schrank

   Why nobody was happy with the summit deal on a new European Union
   treaty


   EVERYBODY always claims victory after European Union summits. Often,
   this is a transparent fib. But this time, pretty much all those who
   attended the summit in Brussels walked away with what they wanted (or
   at least what they said they wanted). That should have made them
   happy, but didn't. Instead the meeting, intended to draft a
   replacement for the ill-fated EU constitution, was a strikingly
   bad-tempered affair. ("Deeply disagreeable", shuddered one veteran
   diplomat.)

   There are several explanations for this sourness. But the most
   interesting may be that, although each of three competing camps came
   away from the summit declaring that they had won, their victories
   exposed how differently the 27 EU members now see their relationship
   with Europe.

   The first and biggest camp took in the 22 countries that arrived
   hoping to resurrect the constitution two years after it was stopped by
   No votes in France and the Netherlands. In broad terms, they
   succeeded. They had to chop the defunct constitution up and rename its
   most contentious elements, like a planned "foreign minister". But in
   the relieved words of the Irish prime minister, Bertie Ahern, "90% of
   it is still there."

   The second camp had a single country: Poland. The twin Kaczynski
   brothers who are Polish president and prime minister fought hard (at
   one point even arguing that Poland should be treated as a bigger
   country, because so many Poles died in the second world war). They
   made few friends, but won one huge concession. The Germans, hosting
   the summit as holder of the EU's rotating presidency, agreed to
   preserve for another decade the existing voting rules, which favour
   Poland and underweight Germany. This gift secured the German
   chancellor, Angela Merkel, the successful outcome that she wanted. But
   it left German officials "as miserable as hell", says one witness.

   Conventional wisdom in Brussels holds that Poland will "pay" for its
   behaviour in a future budget round. That is implausible: the EU is
   incapable of being vengeful with such precision. More perilous for
   Poland is the risk of being deemed unserious. Pushing hard for
   national interests is accepted practice in Brussels. But countries
   that repeatedly flout the rules, issue empty threats or take Europe
   for granted end up losing influence: ask Italy, Greece or Cyprus.
   Tellingly, EU leaders coldly swatted aside a Polish request for laws
   on "public morality" to be exempted from the charter of fundamental
   rights. Given the Poles' record of populist social conservatism, it
   was feared that an exemption would lead to "gays being tarred and
   feathered" on the streets of Warsaw, says one diplomat, exaggerating
   only slightly.

   The third camp, comprising naysayers to the constitution, needed
   visible changes to the text, either because their voters had rejected
   it (the Dutch and French) or because they probably would have done if
   asked (the British and Czechs). France's president, Nicolas Sarkozy,
   became a sort of co-host of the summit, working with Ms Merkel to win
   others round to his vision of a boiled-down, simplified treaty. But Mr
   Sarkozy exacted a price for his help. Whereas Ms Merkel toiled away in
   the shadows, Mr Sarkozy invited press photographers to see him meet a
   string of leaders, then went for a jog wearing mirror-finish
   sunglasses and a black T-shirt with the badge of France's toughest
   police commando unit. Flexing his muscles, Mr Sarkozy persuaded Ms
   Merkel to drop a phrase about "free and undistorted competition" from
   a list of the EU's core objectives. Officials explained that this was
   a political move with no legal consequences, but the signal it sent is
   still worrying (see [4]article).

   Britain claimed victory on all four "red lines" brought to the summit
   by Tony Blair, in almost his last act as prime minister. These
   included the right to stand aloof from European police and judicial
   co-operation, and a (perhaps not watertight) opt-out from any risk
   that the charter of fundamental rights might threaten British labour
   laws. Critics at home accused Mr Blair of choosing only winnable
   battles that were easy for voters to understand but making no effort
   to fight the loss of scores of national vetoes (one tabloid accused
   him of "abject surrender").

   The Eurosceptic tide

   To attack Mr Blair is to miss the target, however. Those in Britain
   who hate the new treaty do not really have a problem with the ex-prime
   minister, but rather with the rest of Europe. For sweeping curbs on
   national vetoes in the name of a more efficient EU were backed by 26
   of the 27 countries.

   Indeed, most other governments thought Mr Blair had secured an
   "outrageous" deal (to use one of the more printable terms), given that
   he signed up to the full constitution only three years ago. There was
   special bafflement that Mr Blair insisted that he could have lived
   with the constitution, even when he was acting as if to recover from
   some dreadful mistake. The explanation is that other countries were
   focusing on the wrong mistake. Mr Blair does not really regret signing
   the constitution. But he is working to recover from the tactical
   blunder of offering a referendum on it.

   Mr Blair got away with his demands only because other leaders can
   easily guess the result of any British referendum. For similar
   reasons, each of the naysayers was rewarded with small changes in the
   text, leaving it an incomprehensible mess of footnotes and protocols.
   This caused mounting fury among those who liked the constitution
   (Belgium's soon-to-depart prime minister threw the loudest tantrum,
   shouting at the Dutch that they were "hollowing out" the European
   project).

   Such peevishness was irrational, in one sense: Belgium wanted the
   constitution and got a text pretty much like it, albeit spattered in
   footnotes. But the same footnotes are evidence of Europe's divisions.
   For anyone whose dream is still some ideal of European unity, the mere
   fact that each competing camp won at this summit was, of itself, a
   defeat.

