
   Immigrants from the former Soviet Union are transforming Jewish life
   in Germany 

                                                                       AP

                                     AP

   IN 1938 Julius Schoeps's parents did what many German Jews who were
   prescient or lucky did at the time: they left. They went to Sweden,
   where Julius's father worked as an archivist. Julius was born there in
   1942.

   Then in 1947 Mr Schoeps did something few German Jews did at the time.
   He went back, followed by his wife seven years later, to join what for
   decades was a tiny, insular community. "These were years of silence.
   Everyone suffered because nobody would talk about the Nazi years. My
   father, who taught at university, often questioned his decision to
   return to Germany," says Mr Schoeps. His father grieved for his own
   parents, Käthe and Julius Schoeps, who had stayed behind in Germany:
   his mother to die in Auschwitz, his father in Theresienstadt.

   German Jews who survived in Germany, or in exile, had a deeply
   ambivalent relationship with their homeland. Apart from guilt--that
   they had survived, and even stayed in the killers' country--many felt
   an almost physical revulsion when they came into close contact with
   Germans. So they retreated to live in yet another form of ghetto.

   By the time the Berlin Wall fell, Germany's Jewish community had only
   30,000 ageing members and was dwindling rapidly. Today it is the
   third-largest, and the fastest-growing, Jewish population in western
   Europe, after France and Britain. Between 1991, when the country was
   unified and immigration rules relaxed, and 2005, more than 200,000
   Jews from the former Soviet Union emigrated to Germany. (At the same
   time, more than a million emigrated from the former Soviet Union to
   Israel and about 350,000 to America, leaving only about 800,000
   behind.) In some parts of Germany, immigrants--usually referred to as
   "the Russians"--make up 90% of the local Jewish population.

   A few of the so-called established Jews--those who lived in Germany
   before the fall of the Berlin Wall--are enthusiastic about the new
   arrivals. Hermann Simon, director of the Centrum Judaicum, a museum
   and research centre in Berlin, was born in 1949 of German parents, and
   grew up in East Berlin. He says that without the immigration of
   Russian Jews, the future for Germany's Jews would be dark.

   Yet most established Jews disagree. The dapper Mr Schoeps, now
   director of the Moses-Mendelssohn Centre for European-Jewish Studies
   in Potsdam, near Berlin, argues that Germany's old Jewish heritage is
   gone. Its so-called "memory landscape"--memorial sites, commemorative
   plaques, cultural centres and museums--is now being guarded by
   gentiles who are merely interested in things Jewish; the sort of
   people who crowd to the Chanukkah market at Berlin's Jewish Museum to
   sample latkes and sufganiot (doughnuts) and to sip kosher mulled wine.

   As for the immigrants from the former Soviet Union, most neither know
   nor care about Jewish rituals and traditions. Few of the newcomers
   keep a kosher home. Many men are not circumcised. When they arrive in
   Germany, they focus on the practicalities of life--jobs, flats, social
   security and health insurance. They play chess rather than Skat, a
   popular card game in Germany. Their cultural icons are Dostoyevsky and
   Tchaikovsky, not Goethe and Beethoven, let alone Mendelssohn or Heine,
   who were German Jews.

   Established Jews find the newcomers anders (different from us),
   suspect that they are not "real" Jews and think they are mainly coming
   in search of prosperity and material help from the state and the
   community. "They take whatever they can get," sniffs one.

   There is also an argument over identity. For decades, Jews in the
   former Soviet Union did their utmost to hide from Soviet authorities
   and even to destroy proof of their origins. So when Germany started to
   admit Jews in 1991 under the "quota refugee law" (which granted them
   special refugee status), many could not assemble the papers required
   to prove their Jewishness. Thousands are reckoned to have got into
   Germany with false documents.

   The strictly orthodox faction in the German community, which is by far
   the strongest, does not accept even the majority of those who came
   with proper identification. According to halakha, or religious law,
   only a convert or a child born to a Jewish mother is Jewish. Jeffrey
   Peck, a professor at Georgetown University and author of "Being Jewish
   in the New Germany", a book exploring the diversity of contemporary
   Jewish life in Germany, says that about 80% of the newcomers are not
   halakhically Jewish. Yet they are the future of Judaism in Germany.

   Judenrein no more

   It is an irony of history that the country that Hitler wanted to make
   judenrein (clean of Jews) now has the fastest-growing Jewish community
   in western Europe. Before the Nazis came to power, about 600,000 Jews
   lived in Germany. At the end of the war some 1,500 survived in hiding;
   9,000 were in concentration camps; and 15,000 survived by marrying
   non-Jews. A few hundred emigrants returned from exile in Shanghai and
   other cities.

   Between 1945 and 1952 some 200,000 Jewish displaced persons lived in
   camps (often disused concentration camps) and urban centres in
   Germany. Most were zealous Zionists. Keen to leave the camps and build
   a new life, they became an influential force in the political debate
   about the creation of a Jewish state. Most of them emigrated to Israel
   as soon as they could after the state's creation in 1948.

   By 1950 only some 20,000 Jews remained in Germany. About 8,000 of
   these were native German Jews; 12,000 came from eastern Europe, mostly
   from Poland. They were ostracised by international Jewish
   organisations because they had decided to stay in the land of the
   perpetrators of the Holocaust. Most of them considered their sojourn
   in Germany to be only temporary; they were "sitting on packed
   suitcases", as they put it, and travelled to Israel at regular
   intervals.

                                                                      EPA
                                                                      EPA

                                               Remembrance of things past

   Defensiveness made German Jews try hard--sometimes too hard--to be
   better friends of Israel than any other diaspora Jews. Anthony
   Kauders, an historian, says that they engaged in "shaming rituals" in
   the 1950s and 1960s to bully fellow Jews into donating money to
   Israel. They had donation rankings, and sent out letters that named
   and shamed anyone who proved stingy. A representative of Keren
   Hayesod, the central fund-raising organisation for Israel, once
   returned DM2,500 (then $600) to a wealthy donor because it seemed too
   small a contribution.

   Germany's growing prosperity and its readiness to come to terms with
   its Nazi past encouraged Jews to unpack their suitcases in the 1970s
   and 1980s. Cultural centres and new synagogues were built; Germany now
   has 89 synagogues. Jews made themselves seen and heard in public life.
   In 1985 Jewish protesters stopped the première of Rainer Werner
   Fassbinder's "Garbage, the City and Death", a play portraying a
   ruthless property developer referred to as "the rich Jew".

   This new Jewish assertiveness became even more evident in the 1990s
   when Ignatz Bubis, a Holocaust survivor and chairman of the Central
   Council of Jews in Germany, started a public spat with Martin Walser,
   a well-known writer. In his speech of acceptance of the German
   Booksellers' Peace Prize, Mr Walser denounced the "moral battering-ram
   of Auschwitz" and pleaded for normality in German-Jewish relations. Mr
   Bubis accused him of "spiritual arson". A heated debate among
   historians, politicians and journalists followed. Indeed, it became so
   venomous that the then president of Germany, Richard von Weizsäcker,
   asked the participants to "cool it".

   More recent arguments have taken place over the "memory landscape".
   Hundreds of memorials now dot Germany, from concentration-camp museums
   to brass bricks sunk in the pavement outside ordinary houses, naming
   the Jews who once lived there. As is often the case with Jewish
   issues, Berlin saw the most heated controversies. Eberhard Diepgen,
   former mayor of Berlin, was unhappy about the plan to build a
   Holocaust memorial, the chief national symbol of atonement, in the
   heart of the city. In a much-criticised speech in parliament, he
   argued that Berlin already had many memorial sites, including the
   Topography of Terror, an entire block in the city centre, which once
   housed the headquarters of the Reich security services. On the
   remaining foundations, uncovered in the mid-1980s, an open-air
   exhibition describes what went on there in grim detail.

   Even so, the city and the federal government went ahead, and in May
   2005, after many delays, the new Holocaust memorial was inaugurated.
   It is an undulating labyrinth of 2,711 concrete blocks on a site the
   size of a football field near the Brandenburg Gate. It is a place
   where visitors are meant to feel unsettled, lost and frightened, as
   the murdered Jews did. And the development of the memory landscape
   continues: at the end of September 2007 a new glass-covered courtyard
   opened at the Jewish Museum Berlin, a building inspired by the
   sharpness and angles of barbed wire. Last March a Jewish museum opened
   in Munich.

   The Red Army faction

   Germany's new Jews are not especially interested in any of this. Most
   of them suffered not under Hitler but under Stalin, who murdered
   millions of Soviet citizens or sent them to brutal labour camps. For
   them, Hitler was the enemy only in a military sense. Each year in
   early May, when everybody else in Germany solemnly commemorates the
   country's unconditional surrender, the Russian war veterans among
   Germany's Jews march around with their military decorations to
   celebrate the victory over Nazi Germany. "This was their proudest
   hour," says Mr Simon from the Centrum Judaicum, who campaigns to give
   the newcomers a voice and an honoured place. Last year he organised
   "From Soviet Star to the Star of David", an exhibition of wartime
   memories of 13 Red Army veterans, which included their personal
   stories.

   German Jews complain that the newcomers have only the faintest notion
   of Judaism and Jewish traditions. In April Mr Schoeps threatened to
   establish a new group of Jews in Berlin, made up of those who feel
   alienated by "the Russians". The immigrant community, he complained,
   "resembles a Russian-speaking cultural club rather than a religious
   association." Albert Meyer, a former head of Berlin's Jews who
   supported Mr Schoeps, accused the Russians of using "Stalinist
   methods" to influence other Jews and said they had no interest in
   faith.

   Berlin's Jewish community is now troubled, not just by its cultural
   divide but also by mismanagement and corruption, involving both
   Russians and Germans, which have tainted its reputation. It has a
   whopping yearly budget of EUR25m ($37m), more than 80% of which is
   paid by the city of Berlin. Most of the running costs of Jewish
   synagogues, schools, cemeteries, libraries, hospitals and nursing
   homes are met by the German state as an atonement for the past. "The
   community has too much money," comments Mr Schoeps. He believes this
   encourages misuse of the funds by Jews, both old and new.

   "People of the second sort"

   Although many German Jews concede that strengthened numbers--of both
   real and purported Jews--will reinvigorate their previously tiny
   community, many complain that they no longer feel at home in their
   community centres and synagogues, where Russian has become the
   language of choice. The Berlin Jews' monthly magazine is now published
   in both Russian and German. In spite of the government's offer of free
   language lessons, many older incomers--and most of them were already
   over 45 when they arrived--have not bothered to learn more than
   rudimentary German. "Of course Jews from the former Soviet Union,
   though highly educated, are people of the `second sort' for the German
   Jewish establishment," says Anna Sokhrina, a Russian writer who now
   lives in Berlin.

   What do those "second sorts" think? Nora Gaydukova, a sociologist who
   left St Petersburg in 1997 with her husband, a doctor, came in the
   hope of a better life and a western education for her second daughter,
   who is 14. (Her older daughter, who is 35, stayed in Russia.) During
   her first years in Germany she felt terribly unhappy; she missed her
   friends and her job. Her Soviet diplomas were worthless. The German
   authorities, who offered her lessons in German, English and computer
   skills on condition that she found a job, discouraged her from
   retaking the sociology exams.

                                                                  Reuters

                                  Reuters

                                He survived

   "Today I am happy in Berlin, which has the only Jewish community that
   feels somehow real," says Ms Gaydukova on a rainy winter afternoon at
   the recently opened centre of the Chabad Lubavitch, a branch of
   Hasidic Judaism, in the western part of Berlin. She is employed as a
   social worker by a Russian cultural association, her daughter is at a
   bilingual (German and Spanish) high school and she has found new
   friends, though she admits that most of them are foreigners as well.
   "There is little contact between Russians and Germans," she notes.

   The Lubavitcher community centre attracts many Jews from the former
   Soviet Union who, like Ms Gaydukova, are keen to learn more about
   Judaism. On the day before the mid-November election of the head of
   the Jewish community in Berlin, Gideon Joffe, fighting for re-election
   after two controversial years in the job, came to address members of
   the congregation while they shared a meal with their rabbis, who come
   from Israel and America. He was gently teased for coming only when he
   is campaigning for votes. He retorted that Berlin has nine synagogues
   and countless community meetings.

   "Real" German Jews, rather than recent immigrants, still monopolise
   the leadership of Jewish communities everywhere in the country,
   although they now represent only about 10-15% of the total Jewish
   population. In the event Lala Süsskind, a 61-year-old woman who came
   to Berlin from Lower Silesia as a baby, beat Mr Joffe in the contest
   for the top job by a large margin. She had campaigned for unity of the
   Jewish community and pleaded with Mr Schoeps, Mr Meyer and other
   alienated Germans to avoid a split. "Her big challenge now is to
   integrate the Russians at last," commented a German Jew who voted for
   her.

   Yet as Sergey Lagodinsky, a former programme director at the Berlin
   Office of the American Jewish Committee, who migrated with his family
   to Germany from southern Russia in 1993, says, one cannot integrate
   85% of a community. In his view, the definition of Jewishness
   according to religious criteria is a chief cause of division; because
   the newcomers tend to be secular, it only alienates them further. In
   November 2006, when a front-page editorial in the Frankfurter
   Allgemeine Zeitung, a conservative and highly respected newspaper,
   said that the biggest challenge for the Jewish community in Germany
   was to make Russian Jews into authentic Jews, Mr Lagodinsky fired back
   with a polemic in Tachles, a Jewish magazine, entitled "False Jews,
   real problems".

   The newcomers pose a difficulty for gentiles, too. Although the
   immigration authorities admit Jews under ethnic guidelines (ie, the
   father or mother have to be Jewish), most non-Jewish Germans insist on
   defining Jewishness in purely religious terms. "This is the result of
   German guilt about the Nazi obsession with race and racial
   stereotypes," says Mr Kauders. Most Germans believe that it is wrong
   to think of a Jew in terms other than adherence to the Jewish
   religion.

   Yet the fact is that times have changed. Germans will have to adapt to
   having a big, largely secular Jewish community. Established Jews will
   have to accept that the glory days of sophisticated German Jewry--from
   Albert Einstein to Kurt Weill--are gone forever. The titles of the two
   most recent books about Jews in Germany since 1945 (both of which were
   published last September) suggest that Germany cannot be the long-term
   home of a forward-looking Jewish community. "L'impossible Retour" (The
   Impossible Return) was written by Olivier Guez, a Frenchman.
   "Unmögliche Heimat" (Impossible Homeland) was penned by Mr Kauders, an
   American. But the authors' conclusions are less stark and more hopeful
   than their titles. "Something new and different is being created with
   the Jews from the Soviet Union," concludes Mr Kauders.

