
   Pre-election tension is rising among the Kurds of Turkey's south-east


   A GOLD-PLATED pistol in one hand, worry beads in the other, Hazim
   Babat sits at the foot of the mountain range that separates Turkey
   from Iraq and contemplates war. He is the chieftain of the Babat clan,
   which is fighting alongside the Turkish armed forces against the
   Kurdistan Workers Party (PKK) separatist guerrillas.

   For years the Babats hunted PKK militants in Iraq with the help of
   Peshmerga warriors from the Kurdistan Democratic Party (KDP) from
   northern Iraq, led by Massoud Barzani. "The PKK slaughtered our women,
   our babies, they are going to pay the price," vows Mr Babat.

   But times have changed and the Kurds are beginning to unite, wherever
   they live. Nowhere is this truer than in northern Iraq where, with
   American support, as many as 4m Kurds have come closer to achieving
   full-blown independence than ever before. Mr Barzani, who runs the
   Kurdish-controlled enclave, declares that the days of Kurdish
   fratricide are over. He refuses to let Turkish soldiers overrun his
   territory in order to attack the PKK. "Turkey's real problem", Mr
   Barzani opined recently, "is that the Kurds exist at all."

   Despite its repeated calls for cross-border action against the PKK,
   the army's real target may be the quasi-independent Kurdish state in
   northern Iraq. The generals see an independent Kurdish state as an
   existential threat because it would stoke separatist passions among
   Turkey's 14m-odd Kurds. They are "willing to prevent its emergence no
   matter the price", asserts Ibrahim Guclu, a veteran Kurdish
   politician. "Yet the harder they push, the closer together they drive
   the Iraqi and Turkish Kurds," he adds.

   Mindful of America's opposition and of Kurdish votes, Turkey's mildly
   Islamist prime minister, Recep Tayyip Erdogan, has ruled out any
   incursion, at least before the general election on July 22nd. Yet
   Turkish forces continue to mass along the Iraqi border. The beefed-up
   army presence is palpable in Sirnak, one of three border provinces in
   which no-go "security zones" have been declared. Turkish soldiers in
   armoured personnel-carriers point guns at passers-by. Attack
   helicopters clatter overhead. In the regional capital of Diyarbakir,
   your correspondent counted no fewer than nine F-16 fighter jets
   screeching towards Sirnak within the space of 20 minutes. The PKK is
   hitting back, murdering soldiers and civilians alike.

   Ayla Akat, a human-rights lawyer who is standing for election in
   Batman for the pro-Kurdish Democratic Turkey Party (DTP), concedes
   that the violence is fuelling anti-Kurdish feelings throughout Turkey.
   She points to the attempted lynching this month of two Kurdish
   seasonal workers in the western province of Sakarya. Yet if the
   government were to accept the PKK's demands to ease restrictions on
   the Kurdish language, offer amnesty to PKK fighters and allow their
   leaders to seek asylum in Europe, "the Kurdish problem would be
   solved", she says. "Is anyone talking about independence?"

   In 2005, emboldened by the European Union's decision to open
   membership talks, Mr Erdogan explored a possible deal that would
   accommodate the Iraqi Kurds too. But he was forced to back off under
   pressure from the army. In the same year Mr Erdogan became the first
   Turkish leader ever to admit that the state had made "mistakes" in
   dealing with the Kurds. His words cemented his Justice and Development
   (AK) Party, whose Islamic credentials play well with millions of pious
   Kurds, as the DTP's main rival in the south-east.

   "My people are going to vote for Erdogan because he wants the European
   Union, and EU membership is the panacea for separatism," says Cemil
   Oter, a tribal leader who has lost 40 men to the PKK. But hopes of
   membership are fading as EU bigwigs, led by France's new president,
   Nicolas Sarkozy, lobby against Turkish entry. EU-inspired reforms that
   helped to win Turkey its prized date for membership talks are being
   quietly rolled back.

   The effects are being felt in Diyarbakir, where a local mayor and his
   entire council were barred from office last week for using Kurdish as
   well as Turkish to communicate with their constituents. Abdullah
   Demirbas had already annoyed the authorities by erecting a monument in
   memory of Ahmet Kaymaz, a Kurdish lorry driver, and his 12-year-old
   son, who were gunned down outside their home in the town of Kiziltepe
   in 2004 on the grounds that they were "terrorists".

   All four members of the special forces who were implicated in the
   killings were exonerated by a court in April, proving that "there is
   rarely justice for the Kurds", says Tahir Elci, a lawyer who defended
   the Kaymaz family. Mr Elci is now facing up to three years in prison
   for criticising the court. Meanwhile, reports of torture have risen
   sharply, because new regulations allow detainees to be denied access
   to a lawyer during the first 24 hours of interrogation by police.

   All these things help to swell PKK ranks. The trouble is that the
   rebels' new tactics--setting off landmines and planting
   explosives--have caught the army off guard. Abdullah Gul, the Turkish
   foreign minister, revealed last week that security forces seized two
   tonnes of plastic explosives smuggled by the PKK from Iraq in 2006
   alone. Mr Gul said that "making compromises over democracy in the name
   of fighting terrorism" was "a trap that should not be contemplated".
   But with each Turkish soldier killed fighting the PKK, Turks'
   enthusiasm for democracy, and for the EU, gets harder to preserve.

