
   The installation of a warlord as Chechnya's president reflects a wider
   trend as Russia braces for next year's presidential election

                                                          Alex Williamson

                              Alex Williamson


   ALU ALKHANOV is unusual among ex-presidents of Chechnya, be they
   secessionists or Kremlin puppets: he is alive. Last week he was
   peacefully relieved of his responsibilities by Vladimir Putin, who
   appointed as acting president the 30-year-old Ramzan Kadyrov, a
   volatile former rebel warlord who is the son of another (deceased)
   Chechen leader.

   Chechnya's fate and Mr Putin's have long been intertwined. He rose to
   power on the back of the Chechen war launched in 1999. Mr Kadyrov's
   elevation (to be rubber-stamped by the Chechen parliament) is designed
   to ensure Chechnya's stability in the nervous run-up to Mr Putin's
   putative departure from office in 2008. It formalises the de facto
   power that, with his feared militia, Mr Kadyrov has long wielded
   anyway. But it also reflects, as Chechnya tends to, the wider
   political situation in Russia. It is part of what Vladimir Ryzhkov, an
   independent member of the lower house of parliament, the Duma,
   describes as a political zachistka (purge): a word mainly used to
   describe bloody Russian raids on Chechen villages.

   The raids on Russia's constitution are incremental but no less
   insidious. The 5% threshold to win seats in the Duma, already set high
   enough to keep out all the liberal parties at the 2003 election, will
   be raised to 7% for the parliamentary poll later this year. Parties
   are barred from forming coalitions to get over it. Candidates may come
   only from party lists; in the previous system half were directly
   elected by district (that enabled Mr Ryzhkov, for example, to
   survive). Candidates can be debarred for "extremism"; that includes
   slandering a public official. Minimum turnout rules have also been
   scrapped, as has the option of voting "against all". So boycotts and
   protest votes can no longer be used to register dissent.

   Dirty tricks are common. Halls booked for opposition party meetings
   become suddenly unavailable. Rallies and protest marches are easily
   banned, and smothered by riot police when they are not.

   "All our actions", Mr Putin said recently in Munich, "are designed to
   strengthen a multi-party system in Russia." Quite so. Along with
   United Russia, the blindly loyal majority block, the next Duma will
   most likely have a Communist rump and the Liberal Democrats: a largely
   comical faux-nationalist outfit also loyal to the Kremlin. The main
   "opposition" party may be a new one called A Just Russia, created by
   the Kremlin last year to appeal to left-wing and nationalist voters.
   The result, says Grigory Yavlinsky of Yabloko, a fading liberal party,
   is the "illusion of competition", rather like that between rival
   boyars in tsarist times. Mr Ryzhkov, whose Republican Party is also
   stymied by election rules, calls it the "Dresden system", a reference
   to East Germany's bogus multiparty system, which Mr Putin doubtless
   recalls from his spying days in Dresden.

   There are other obstacles for the outsiders. After the example made of
   Mikhail Khodorkovsky, a former oil tycoon now facing fresh criminal
   charges from his Siberian prison, businessmen are disinclined to fund
   Mr Putin's critics. Meanwhile, the Kremlin's grip on the media ensures
   such voices are rarely heard.

   Some small-scale independence survives. Take Novoye Vremya (The New
   Times) a new magazine whose boss was sacked from a big daily paper for
   his too-frank coverage of the Beslan school siege in 2004. Yevgenia
   Albats, its political editor, blames the tameness of much of the print
   media on self-censorship and ambition. "If you want to be part of the
   establishment," she says "you cannot write the truth." Outside Moscow
   journalists face graver perils: this week, in the North Caucasus town
   of Vladikavkaz, the office of IWPR, a brave London-based journalism
   network, was raided by the police. Yet there are signs of life too:
   Victor Fedofenko quit his paper in the Siberian town of
   Khanty-Mansiysk, after its owner vetoed an article on embezzlement. He
   and his colleagues started a new one, with a picture of Che Guevara on
   its first front page, because, says Mr Fedofenko, "We associate him
   with freedom."

   But television--from which most Russians get their news--is another
   story, as even Kremlin officials admit. Political news is dominated by
   flattering coverage of Mr Putin's day. All the main channels are in
   effect controlled by the Kremlin. The general trend, says Masha Lipman
   of the Carnegie Moscow Centre, is to safe, non-political subjects.

   Mr Putin and his aides argue that similar approaches can be found in
   Western countries. But cumulatively they represent a concerted erosion
   of democratic freedoms. Some measures, such as onerous new
   registration rules for campaigning groups, have not yet resulted in
   the draconian clampdowns some predicted. But they create anxiety and
   instil obedience simply by existing. So does the re-emergence of
   Soviet-style checkups on those citizens having too close contact with
   foreigners and other undesirables.

   The mystery is why, popular as he is, Mr Putin bothers with all these
   superfluous instruments of control. Part of the answer is: because he
   can. But another part is that his worry is probably not defeat in
   stage-managed elections, but rather unrest on the streets (hence the
   creation of a pro-Kremlin youth movement). That, plus infighting or
   palace coups inside the Kremlin, where Russia's real political
   competition takes place.

   The need to maintain a balance between rival Kremlin clans seems to
   explain Mr Putin's other main personnel move last week, which was to
   shift Sergei Ivanov from the defence ministry to be a first deputy
   prime minister. That rank is also held by Dmitry Medvedev, who like Mr
   Ivanov is considered a frontrunner to succeed Mr Putin in 2008. That
   may free Mr Ivanov from the tarnish of perpetual scandals over
   brutality in the army (one recent allegation is that soldiers in St
   Petersburg were forced into prostitution). Some now speculate that the
   2008 presidential contest will be between two approved candidates. But
   the main benefit of the change is to Mr Putin, who has reasserted his
   grip on the succession process and shored up his power.

   That is another way in which Chechnya reflects, in extreme form, the
   general situation. Under Mr Kadyrov in Chechnya, as under Mr Putin in
   all Russia, economic improvements have come at a cost of corruption,
   opacity and lawlessness. Both regimes rest on highly personalised rule
   that looks secure but may yet prove unstable.

