
   Quarrels over a plan to commemorate German expellees from the east 


   SOME 12m ethnic Germans were expelled from their homes in eastern
   Europe after the second world war; tens of thousands died. Those who
   settled in Germany have long wanted a central memorial to their
   tragedy, but the enormity of the Holocaust and tricky regional
   politics have kept them waiting. On October 22nd Germany's chancellor,
   Angela Merkel, used the 50th anniversary of the Union of Expellees to
   announce government plans for a documentation and exhibition centre on
   refugees and expulsions.

   Will this satisfy the lobbies with the keenest interest? Erika
   Steinbach, head of the expellees' group, professes to be pleased. The
   state has "done its job" by agreeing to create a centre of memory for
   victims of expulsion, she says. Yet a federal place of mourning is
   just what Ms Steinbach's critics want to stop. Anything that likened
   their plight to what befell Jews, gypsies and other victims of Nazi
   genocide would distort history and offend many. And an official
   monument that implied guilt on the part of countries that expelled
   them could enrage the Polish and Czech governments.

   Ms Steinbach, a member of Ms Merkel's Christian Democratic Union
   (CDU), has fanned such suspicions with her blunt advocacy of the
   expellees' claims. Ask her who was responsible for their tragedy, and
   she instantly says it was the countries that pushed them out. She has
   "wrecked our relations with Poland", says Wolfgang Benz of the Centre
   for the Study of Anti-Semitism in Berlin.

   The document centre, under the aegis of Berlin's German History
   Museum, is meant to avoid controversy. It would deal with expulsions
   in general, not only those of Germans. Nor would it be at all like
   Berlin's Holocaust memorial. "There can be nothing against a
   scientific centre," says Mr Benz. The CDU's partners, the Social
   Democrats, want Ms Steinbach to have nothing to do with the centre.
   Poland's recent election, which ousted the nationalist prime minister,
   Jaroslaw Kaczynski, in favour of Donald Tusk, a moderate, may help.

   Commemorative fashions go in cycles, says Gavriel Rosenfeld, a
   historian at Connecticut's Fairfield University. Shortly after the war
   urban memorials commemorated mainly Germans themselves, including
   victims of Allied bombing. That began to change in the 1960s, and even
   more in the 1980s, when the political climate made it seem more
   appropriate to concentrate on the Nazis' victims. Now, after several
   books about post-war suffering and the new documentation centre,
   Germans may return to themselves. The latest example: a defence
   ministry plan for a memorial to the 2,600 German soldiers who have
   died for the federal republic.

