
   President Nicolas Sarkozy courts controversy by welcoming Libya's
   leader, Muammar Qaddafi


   THE khaki Bedouin tent was pitched just across from the Elysée Palace.
   Police blocked off the road to allow a white stretch limousine to
   glide into the courtyard. In short, Nicolas Sarkozy bent over
   backwards to welcome Muammar Qaddafi, Libya's leader, on a five-day
   visit. By doing so he prompted a furore in France--and called into
   question his declared wish for a more moral foreign policy.

                                                                  Reuters
                                                                  Reuters

                                            Welcome to Paris, mon colonel

   Mr Sarkozy is not the only Western leader to embrace Mr Qaddafi since
   the Libyan leader escaped from diplomatic isolation in 2003, after
   renouncing a secret nuclear-weapons programme and taking official
   responsibility for past acts of terrorism. Britain's Tony Blair
   dropped in on him in Tripoli in 2004, and was back again to sign an
   oil deal earlier this year. Italy's Romano Prodi, as European
   Commission president, met him in Brussels.

   But nobody else has laid on such a welcome. Mr Qaddafi had two
   audiences with Mr Sarkozy, as well as a parliamentary reception and
   dinner at the Elysée--on World Human Rights Day. In return, Libya
   agreed to buy from France hardware worth more than EUR10 billion ($14
   billion), including 21 Airbus aircraft, military helicopters, 14
   Rafale fighters, armoured vehicles and missiles. France is also to
   supply a nuclear reactor to Libya. The ground for these deals was
   prepared in June, when Mr Sarkozy visited Mr Qaddafi after the Libyan
   leader had freed six Bulgarian medical staff on death row, following
   intermediation by the president's then wife, Cécilia.

   Mr Sarkozy may merely be keeping up a tradition of using diplomacy for
   commercial ends, something his predecessor, Jacques Chirac, did all
   the time. But unlike Mr Chirac, Mr Sarkozy claims to want a
   human-rights dimension in foreign policy. One goal of French
   diplomacy, he said in his election campaign, should be "to promote
   freedom and human rights on the international scene". He added that
   "just because China and Russia are great powers one should not refrain
   from denouncing the violations of human rights that are committed
   there." To this end, he made Bernard Kouchner, a left-wing former
   humanitarian champion, his foreign minister. And he gave Rama Yade, a
   feisty 31-year-old Senegalese, a human-rights post in the foreign
   ministry.

   Yet a pattern has emerged that does not fit these lofty aspirations.
   When Mr Sarkozy flew to China last month, and bagged over EUR19
   billion in contracts for French firms, he excluded Ms Yade from the
   trip. When Russia staged a flawed legislative election, described by
   Germany's Angela Merkel as "neither a free, fair nor democratic
   election", Mr Sarkozy telephoned Vladimir Putin to offer
   "congratulations", to the dismay of fellow Europeans.

   This week opposition deputies walked out in protest over Mr Qaddafi's
   visit to parliament. Even more stinging criticism came from Ms Yade.
   "Colonel Qaddafi must understand", the human-rights minister told Le
   Parisien, "that our country is not a doormat, on which a leader,
   terrorist or not, can come to wipe the blood of his crimes from his
   feet." As for Mr Kouchner, he was in Brussels during the Elysée
   dinner; he called this a "happy coincidence".

   Mr Sarkozy argues that it is sterile to oppose an idealistic to a
   realistic brand of foreign policy. He believes you can pursue both.
   Even as he pushes arms contracts and entertains the likes of Mr
   Qaddafi, he is also sending over 1,000 French peacekeepers to the
   Darfur border. France is ready to talk to anybody who tries to improve
   their behaviour. As Mr Sarkozy asked, "what would we say to Iranian
   leaders if we did not offer a hand to a Libyan leader who has himself
   chosen to turn his back on nuclear arms and terrorism?"

   The trouble arises when one pursues moral diplomacy and realpolitik
   with the same country. Were the arms contracts from Libya part of the
   deal to free the Bulgarian nurses? Mr Sarkozy says not, but the terms
   are being looked at by a parliamentary inquiry. Mr Sarkozy is pressing
   to free hostages in Colombia, among them Ingrid Betancourt, a
   Franco-Colombian. But he also persuaded the Colombians to free a top
   guerrilla from the FARC, considered a terrorist group by America and
   Europe.

   In short, Mr Sarkozy's action-man diplomacy is about results, not
   means: if it works, it works. The release of Ms Betancourt, for
   instance, would be warmly welcomed in France. And Mr Sarkozy has no
   time for left-bank intellectuals "so sure of what they think while
   drinking coffee on the Boulevard Saint-Germain". They may not have
   much time for him, either.

