
                                                                      AFP

                                    AFP

   The Turkish army continues to play a big role in the country's
   domestic and foreign politics--too big, say its critics


   THIS week's flurry of stories about a purported Turkish invasion of
   northern Iraq confirmed again the special position the army has in
   Turkey. The reports turned out to be exaggerated, but troops and
   armour are massing on the border (see picture), and fears of a
   large-scale intrusion into Iraq remain (see [4]article). For now,
   though, attention will revert to the army's part in domestic politics.

   It is brought home over tea in Istanbul's posh Galata district by
   Tayfun Mater, a left-wing activist, as he describes being tortured
   after the coup in 1980. "The worst bit was when they hung me from the
   ceiling by the arms and applied electric shocks to my penis and
   testicles," says Mr Mater, who spent five years in prison. By the time
   the army handed back power to the civilians in 1983, over half a
   million Turks had been put in prison; 50, including a 17-year-old boy,
   were executed.

   Until recently most Turks believed the days of coups were over. But
   that belief was shattered late on April 27th, when a threat to
   intervene against Turkey's mildly Islamist government was posted on
   the general staff's website, touching off a political earthquake that
   still reverberates.

   The "cyber coup" eventually led the prime minister, Recep Tayyip
   Erdogan, to call an early general election on July 22nd. Abdullah Gul,
   the foreign minister, had to withdraw his bid to replace President
   Ahmet Necdet Sezer, who was due to step down in May. Yet the polls
   suggest that Mr Erdogan's AK Party may return with even more than the
   34% that, thanks to most other parties missing the 10% threshold for
   seats, catapulted it to sole power in 2002. What might the generals do
   then?

   The question echoes around the Ankara cocktail circuit, but it raises
   a host of others. Was the ultimatum delivered under pressure from
   hot-headed junior officers threatening to take matters into their own
   hands? Does the army really believe that the AK government is steering
   Turkey away from Ataturk's revered secular republic towards religious
   rule? Was it all a crude stab at wrecking Turkey's chances of joining
   the European Union? And, again, will the army invade northern Iraq?

   The diary of Ozden Ornek, a retired naval chief, leaked in late March
   to Nokta, a Turkish weekly, suggests several factors may have been
   involved. Excerpts include details of two separate planned coups
   concocted in 2004 that were quashed by the then chief of the general
   staff, Hilmi Ozkok. Conversations between the plotters show suspicions
   of both AK and General Ozkok. Indeed, his enthusiasm for democracy and
   the EU leads them to conclude that he is an "Islamist" too.

   Mr Ornek insists the diary is fake and is suing Nokta for libel. But
   General Ozkok has hinted otherwise, saying that the claims "needed to
   be investigated". Meanwhile, military prosecutors have filed separate
   charges against Lale Sariibrahimoglu, a respected military analyst,
   for her comments to Nokta (which has since been closed down). She
   could spend two years in jail if convicted on charges of "insulting
   members of the military".

   The notion that "the army knows what is best for the people and that
   they cannot be trusted to govern themselves lies at the heart of their
   continued meddling in politics," observes Umit Kardas, a retired
   military prosecutor. It was such thinking (drilled into young officers
   early on) that led the generals to enshrine a right to intervene in
   the regulations that they drafted for themselves in the 1980s.

   The EU insists that any such right must be scrapped if Turkey is ever
   to join its club. So must the system of military courts, which shield
   soldiers from prosecution by civilians. The chief of the general staff
   should be answerable to the defence minister, not the other way round.
   Not surprisingly, the generals' feelings towards the EU are now mixed.
   Joining the EU would crown Ataturk's dream of cementing Turkey's place
   in the West. Yet they want this "only if it can be on their own
   terms--and that means retaining all their privileges," according to
   Ali Bayramoglu, a long-time observer of the army.

   Mr Erdogan became the first political leader to have trimmed the
   army's powers, when his government reduced the National Security
   Council (through which the army barks orders) to an advisory role.
   This and other dramatic reforms helped to persuade the EU to open
   membership talks with Turkey in 2005.

   Fears that their influence might be watered down even more have
   transformed some generals into the EU's fiercest critics. None more so
   than Yasar Buyukanit, who took over from General Ozkok last year. His
   salvoes against creeping Islamisation are often accompanied by veiled
   claims that the EU is trying to dismember Turkey by supporting Kurds
   and other minorities.

   The army's sense of vulnerability has been heightened by a deepening
   rift with America over Iraq. During the cold war, the generals (in
   charge of NATO's second-biggest army) were America's chief
   interlocutors, which bolstered their influence at home. Anti-American
   feelings exploded among Turks in 2003, when American soldiers arrested
   11 Turkish special-force troops in northern Iraq, on suspicion of
   plotting to murder a Kurdish politician. Most Turks saw the move as
   punishment for Turkey's refusal earlier that year to let American
   troops cross its territory to open a second front in Iraq. Trust
   between the two armies has yet to be restored. Tuncer Kilinc, the
   penultimate general to head the National Security Council, told an
   audience in London recently that Turkey should pull out of NATO and
   make friends with Russia, Iran, China and India instead.

   The army's anti-Western stance resonates well with ordinary Turks, who
   are disgusted by America's behaviour in Iraq and by the EU's dithering
   over Turkish membership. The army is still rated as the country's most
   popular institution. To the millions of urban middle-class Turks who
   staged anti-government protests last month, the army remains the best
   guarantor of Ataturk's secular republic.

   Yet, as Mr Ornek reportedly noted in his diary, the deliberate
   isolation of officers from civilian life has confined them to an
   artificial world in which civilians are "unpatriotic, lazy and venal"
   and the armed forces are "industrious, selfless and worthy". As he
   then mused, "What can we achieve with such thoughts?" Yet if the army
   is to continue to command the affection of its citizens it needs to
   change with the times. The generals could not have missed the many
   placards during last month's protests that read "No to sharia, No to
   coups." A drive to weed out corrupt officers launched under General
   Ozkok is an encouraging sign that the army is prepared to be more
   self-critical. But respecting the election result, no matter what it
   is, remains the biggest challenge of all.

