
   A new star takes the European stage


   HOLLYWOOD calls it star quality. In politics, the word is charisma.
   Nobody can define it; everybody wants it; and France's President
   Nicolas Sarkozy seems to have it. That was certainly the impression
   created at the European Union summit in Brussels. As Britain's Tony
   Blair briefed jaded reporters in a room dotted with empty chairs, Mr
   Sarkozy wowed a jam-packed press room next door. One diplomat talked
   admiringly of his "fizzing political energy". Even the leftish daily
   Libération declared the summit "an unquestionable success" for Mr
   Sarkozy, and published a poll showing that 63% of French voters
   approve of him.

   Nearly two months after his election, outsiders are getting the
   measure of the "hyper-president". For ten years, Mr Blair has been the
   European leader who fascinated his peers the most. Now Mr Sarkozy
   could take on that role. His showmanship may sometimes grate, but even
   his detractors recognise his energy and his deal-making skills.
   "Frankly," said Jack Lang, a Socialist Party grandee, of the summit,
   "we couldn't have done it better."

   The main trophy Mr Sarkozy brought home from Brussels was the new
   simplified treaty that, he likes to recall, he single-handedly dreamt
   up as a presidential candidate. But there was more. "We have obtained
   a major reorientation of the union's objectives," he said of the
   removal of a clause enshrining "free and undistorted competition" as
   an EU objective. To the consternation of market liberals, he said this
   meant "the end of competition as an ideology and dogma" in Europe.

   What is the hitherto reformist Mr Sarkozy's game? Partly, it is just
   domestic politics. Although he has been handed a robust mandate, Mr
   Sarkozy is still mindful of the 55% of French voters who rejected the
   draft EU constitution in a referendum two years ago. Among them was
   around half the Socialist Party. At the time, the No campaign
   denounced the phrase on undistorted competition as evidence of a
   liberal Anglo-Saxon plot. When parliament ratifies the new treaty,
   probably next year, Mr Sarkozy hopes to deploy the removal of this
   clause to disarm rejectionists.

   A second answer, however, has more to do with conviction than tactics.
   Mr Sarkozy has long advocated an unorthodox blend of free-market
   economics with unapologetic industrial interventionism. On fiscal
   policy and labour-market reform, he is genuinely liberal. But as
   finance minister in 2004 he irked the Germans by helping a French drug
   firm to take over a Franco-German rival, as well as thwarting an
   effort by another German company, Siemens, to buy bits of Alstom, a
   French engineering group. Mr Sarkozy persuaded the European Commission
   to let him use taxpayers' money to rescue Alstom--which in the end
   paid off handsomely for the state--but was exasperated by the bruising
   battle it involved. He thus showed not only his belief in national
   champions, but also his visible irritation with the idea that such
   champions can be blocked by Brussels.

   In Mr Sarkozy's case, this belief is not merely a classic Colbertist
   reflex. He did not attend the elite Ecole Nationale d'Administration,
   so is not programmed to believe in dirigisme. Rather, he mixes
   Gaullist faith in the state with a tinge of industrial romanticism.
   During his election, his preferred campaign stop was the factory
   floor, where he liked to be surrounded by workers in blue overalls and
   hard hats, symbols of the industrious values of muscular hard work and
   early rising. Everywhere he repeated his rallying cry: "If the
   factories go, there will be nothing left."

   Mr Sarkozy is thus promising to be a vigorous defender of French
   industry. This could provoke awkward clashes. In mid-July, he faces
   delicate negotiations over the future of the aviation group EADS at a
   Franco-German meeting in Toulouse. On non-industrial matters, and to
   British indignation, he is also serious about opposing Turkish
   membership of the EU: this week France blocked the opening of one of
   three new chapters in Turkey's negotiations. In short, nobody should
   doubt Mr Sarkozy's determination to get his way. Star quality may
   dazzle, but even box-office sensations can be hard to deal with.

