
   A timely reminder of the risk of terrorism in Europe

   THE targets are said to have included Frankfurt airport, Germany's
   busiest, and an American air base. The collective power of the bombs
   would have exceeded those used in Madrid and London in 2004 and 2005
   respectively. But on September 4th the plot to commit Germany's
   bloodiest act of terrorism was foiled with the arrest of three men in
   a village in central Germany. The arrests came a day after Danish
   police averted another "major act of terrorism" by arresting eight
   young Muslims in the suburbs of Copenhagen. Six were later released
   but two were charged.

   That terrorist conspiracies could be hatched in Denmark and Germany is
   not a complete surprise. The Danes have staged three terrorism swoops
   in three years. Last year two men of Lebanese origin planted suitcase
   bombs on two trains in Germany; they failed to explode. There have
   been many reports of young Germans going to Pakistan for training
   sessions. The interior minister, Wolfgang Schäuble, has given warning
   of high risks.

   Yet most Germans assumed their country was relatively safe, mainly
   because (unlike Britain, Denmark and Spain) it did not send troops to
   Iraq. "Germans don't take the threat as seriously as they should,"
   said Guido Steinberg, a former adviser to the chancellery on
   terrorism, days before the arrests.

   That will change now. Two of the arrested men are German converts to
   Islam. The other is one of Germany's 3m Turks, who have provided few
   terrorist recruits. Two of the three had trained in Pakistan and all
   seem to have links with the Islamic Jihad Union, which staged several
   terrorist attacks in Uzbekistan in 2004. They may have been planning
   to strike on the anniversary of the September 11th attacks in New
   York. And they may have hoped to affect the debate on Germany's 3,000
   troops in Afghanistan. Germany is to decide shortly whether to renew
   its commitments there, which are unpopular and opposed by many Social
   Democrats.

   Germany's law-enforcement coup may also boost Mr Schäuble's campaign
   for a law that would allow the authorities to spy on suspected
   terrorists by secretly inserting "remote forensic software" into their
   computers. That proposal has sparked an outcry in a country that is
   especially sensitive to the possibility of abuse by secret police.
   Since the law has not yet been passed, the authorities could not use
   such spyware to catch the would-be bombers, Mr Schäuble said. But he
   added that, since terrorists use "modern communications", so should
   the government.

