
   Viktor Gerashchenko, an implausible presidential candidate


   THE Kremlin has no taste for spontaneous opposition. It could thus
   hardly wish for a better opponent than Viktor Gerashchenko, a sardonic
   former central banker. He is old, adaptable, unpopular and has little
   chance of uniting the opposition, let alone the country. Even in
   Moscow his rating is no more than 10%. Indeed, the Kremlin liked him
   so much that, in the 2004 election, it asked him to play the part of a
   challenger from the nationalist Rodina party to Vladimir Putin. "They
   felt they wanted someone respectable to stand against Putin," he says.

   This time the 69-year-old Mr Gerashchenko has volunteered himself as a
   joint candidate for the opposition. The reason, he claims, is that he
   can no longer stand the way that Mr Putin runs Russia. Even if he is
   old, he says, so was Charles de Gaulle. Yet his nomination testifies
   to the sad state of Russia's political opposition, which lacks
   unifying leaders and ideas. Other candidates include a former prime
   minister, Mikhail Kasyanov, whose rating is half that of Mr
   Gerashchenko's, and Vladimir Bukovsky, a Soviet dissident in Britain.

   More significantly, Mr Gerashchenko's stance is a sign of growing
   alienation among the old Soviet elite from the Kremlin, which they
   feel has been hijacked by unprofessional security-service officers. Mr
   Gerashchenko was the cream of the Soviet bureaucracy. His father was a
   leading banker and Mr Gerashchenko was posted to London to the first
   Soviet foreign bank at only 28. Two years later, he moved to Beirut
   (he is said to be highly respected by the KGB elite).

   As head of the central bank under Russia's first post-Soviet
   president, Boris Yeltsin, he handed out cheap credits to weak Russian
   banks, leading to high inflation and winning him the sobriquet "the
   worst central banker in the world" from Jeffrey Sachs, an American
   economist. His most recent incarnation was as chairman of Yukos, a now
   dismantled oil company, whose founder is in a Russian jail: "I was
   supposed to be a go-between for the Kremlin and Mikhail Khodorkovsky,"
   he says.

   Nor did Mr Gerashchenko mince words when he summed up, on air, the
   fate of Yukos: "The fuckers nicked it." His office was raided by
   prosecutors, who left empty-handed. His biggest issue with the Kremlin
   is not war in Chechnya, foreign policy or even freedom of speech; it
   is the inefficiency, endemic stealing and lack of professionalism of
   top bureaucrats. "The infrastructure is in a terrible state, most
   people in Russia live extremely poorly; there is no competition in
   some sectors, which means high inflation. Given the conditions, we
   could live a lot better."

   What upsets him and his peers most is Mr Putin's "cadres policy". For
   all its rigidity, the Soviet Union offered some social mobility and a
   way for bright, politically ambitious or well-connected people from
   the provinces to rise to the top. The system needed and promoted
   professionals, says Mr Gerashchenko. But Mr Putin's entourage is made
   up mainly of people who "went to the same school or played in the same
   courtyard", he adds. His views may not appeal to ordinary Russians,
   but they will to those among the elite who failed to play in the same
   sandpit as Mr Putin.

