
   A worm in the bud of the rose revolution?


   AS BEFITS a land of film-makers and actors, Georgia likes to play its
   politics as spectacle. That is why, on September 28th, Rustaveli
   Avenue, in Tbilisi, was again awash with demonstrators. Echoes of the
   rose revolution of four years ago are faint: the numbers were far
   smaller and most of the protesters older. But by bringing the crowds
   on to the same streets as in November 2003, the opposition made a
   telling point against President Mikhail Saakashvili.

   The man whose arrest on corruption charges drew out the protesters is
   a former defence minister, Irakly Okruashvili. At 33, he is younger
   and more hotheaded even than Mr Saakashvili. He once promised to
   celebrate new year in Tskhinvali, capital of the breakaway territory
   of South Ossetia. Mr Saakashvili sacked him last year. Mr Okruashvili
   brooded silently for months before producing lurid allegations against
   his former boss. He has accused the president of ordering the murder
   of a Georgian media magnate, Badri Patarkatsishvili, and has cast
   doubt on the death in 2005 of the then prime minister, Zurab Zhvania,
   officially in an accident.

   Yet it is Mr Okruashvili's charges of corruption in the president's
   inner circle that may be more damaging. Mr Saakashvili made his name
   as a crusader for honest government and against nepotism. Mr
   Okruashvili now looks like the jilted outcast of a clan that bends the
   law in its own interests. He has put before Georgians some ugly
   questions that need answering. Mr Saakashvili has dismissed Mr
   Okruashvili's claims as "unpardonable lies"--but he has not answered
   them directly.

   On the whole, Mr Saakashvili's young team has transformed Georgia for
   the better, increasing tax revenues and overhauling the public sector.
   But critics say some measures have paid scant regard to due process.
   Allegedly corrupt officials have been arrested on television and made
   to pay fines directly into the state budget. Prisoners have been
   ill-treated. Shopkeepers and residents of Tbilisi complain that their
   property rights have been flouted in the name of rebuilding the city.
   The leaders of a bloodless revolution in a poor country now preside
   over one of the world's fastest-growing defence budgets.

   A host of discontents has crystallised around the arrest of Mr
   Okruashvili. Eight opposition groups have united into one. Mr
   Saakashvili is losing the aura he once had of being the sole
   undisputed leader of Georgia. In the past he has faced down critics
   with histrionics and theatrical brinkmanship. A sober response, not so
   far in his political repertoire, may now be called for.

