
   Yulia Tymoshenko wins a second chance

   IT WAS a telling contrast. Just one day after President Vladimir Putin
   more or less appointed himself Russia's next prime minister, the Rada
   (parliament) in Kiev chose in a free vote to make Yulia Tymoshenko
   Ukraine's prime minister. It also exposed the fallacy that post-Soviet
   Slav countries cannot be democratic.

                                                                      AFP
                                                                      AFP

                                         Yes, I have my majority--at last

   Ukraine has been cited by the Kremlin as an example of democratic
   turbulence to be avoided. Russian television has gloated over
   Ukraine's chaotic politics, pointing up the advantages of Russia's
   stable system, in which decisions are taken by the Kremlin and
   rubber-stamped by the Duma. Ukraine's politics have been messy ever
   since the orange revolution of late 2004, when Viktor Yushchenko
   became president.

   Yet for all the disillusion in the orange camp, Ukrainians gave it one
   more chance in the parliamentary election on September 30th. Ms
   Tymoshenko's party did well, taking votes from the Party of the
   Regions led by Viktor Yanukovich, the outgoing prime minister. With
   the pro-Yushchenko Our Ukraine block, Ms Tymoshenko had enough seats
   to push out the Party of the Regions. But it took two months for her
   to form a coalition. Nerves were further frayed on December 11th, when
   the electronic voting system failed to register two votes for Ms
   Tymoshenko. But on December 18th the parliament at last backed Ms
   Tymoshenko, by a one-vote margin.

   The good news is that Ukraine has proved itself to be a genuine
   democracy, with a fierce competition for power and now a functioning
   opposition. As one Russian oligarch notes, Ukrainian politicians have
   tried it all to win power: election-rigging in 2004, money to bribe
   politicians to switch sides in 2005-06 and now democracy.

   Ms Tymoshenko and Mr Yushchenko have been here before. He made her
   prime minister in early 2005, only to fire her months later. She
   blames her failure on the fact that she did not have her own team and
   was undermined by Mr Yushchenko's friends. Now she is in a stronger
   position and has already shaped her own cabinet. She promises judicial
   and economic reform, more open government and an end to murky
   intermediaries in the gas trade with Russia. But some pledges may be
   impossible to deliver.

   Her first challenge is to keep the orange coalition together. The Our
   Ukraine block consists of ten parties. Some of Mr Yushchenko's
   supporters cannot stand Ms Tymoshenko. Mr Yushchenko may feel
   justifiably threatened by her as a potential presidential candidate in
   2009. But to be credible, Ms Tymoshenko must tame her populist
   instincts. In a presidential election she will be judged on her record
   as prime minister. If the orange coalition fails to modernise and
   reform Ukraine, it would betray those who three years ago helped stage
   the orange revolution in the snow of Kiev. It would also set a bad
   example for other ex-Soviet republics--and give even more cause for
   Russian gleefulness.

