
   Serbia's presidential election this weekend is critical to the
   region's future

                                                                      AFP
                                                                      AFP

                                                     Tadic, a tad nervous


   WHEN an election was held in Croatia last November, it was hailed as
   the first in 20 years in which voters could be sure that the winner
   would not stop Croatia from moving towards the European Union. Judging
   by the rancorous debates of recent weeks, the people of Serbia, who
   vote for a president on January 20th, can only envy their neighbours.

   There are two serious candidates: Boris Tadic, the pro-European
   incumbent, and Tomislav Nikolic, acting leader of the
   extreme-nationalist Radicals. Although more formal power lies with the
   prime minister, Vojislav Kostunica, than with the president, the
   result matters hugely. And it comes at a delicate moment. Within weeks
   Kosovo plans to declare independence, and will be recognised by many
   countries. How Serbia responds will define its future.

   On paper Kosovo is still part of Serbia. But since the war of 1999 it
   has been under the jurisdiction of the United Nations. Some 90% of its
   2m people are ethnic Albanians who have long demanded independence.
   When that comes, it will be the end of the Serbian control, real or
   nominal, that began when Serbia retook the province from the Ottoman
   Turks in 1912.

   The UN is handing control of Kosovo over to the EU, which has agreed
   in principle to establish a large mission to deal with police and
   justice in the province. At the same time Serbia is ready to sign a
   stabilisation and association agreement (SAA) with the EU, normally a
   first step towards membership. That would bring substantial funds plus
   a set of reforms the country needs to make before joining, thereby
   catching up with Croatia, which is already negotiating its EU
   membership. It may be helpful that Slovenia, another bit of former
   Yugoslavia, currently holds the six-monthly rotating EU presidency.

   Mr Tadic's party is pro-Western, but still opposes Kosovo's
   independence. It shares power in government with Mr Kostunica's
   conservative nationalists. Mr Kostunica has said that any EU mission
   to Kosovo would be illegal without Serbia's consent, and also that
   Serbia should not sign its SAA if the mission goes ahead or if most EU
   countries recognise Kosovo's independence (which they will).

   Mr Tadic responds that, whatever happens in Kosovo, Serbia has no
   choice but to sign the SAA. Mladjan Dinkic, Serbia's finance minister,
   adds that it would be a "catastrophe" if Serbia were the only country
   in the region left out of the EU. Serbia, he says, will attract $6
   billion of foreign direct investment this year, but it is clear that
   potential investors will lose faith if the country abandons its course
   for the EU. Mr Nikolic, on the other hand, agrees with Mr Kostunica
   that if most EU countries go ahead with plans to recognise Kosovo,
   Serbia should give up trying to join the club.

   Opinion polls suggest a close result on January 20th, which means a
   second round between the top two candidates will have to be held on
   February 3rd. Mr Kostunica's party is not offering a candidate,
   neither is it backing Mr Tadic; many of the prime minister's
   supporters may rather vote for Mr Nikolic in the second round. And
   though Mr Tadic may still squeak through, he cannot count on much
   enthusiasm from many of his erstwhile supporters who think he has been
   a weak president, bossed around by Mr Kostunica.

   It was originally hoped that Serbia could sign the SAA on January
   28th, between the two rounds. That hope is fading, because some
   countries are reluctant to let Serbia have the deal until it hands
   over Ratko Mladic, a Bosnian-Serb general indicted for genocide, to
   The Hague war-crimes tribunal. Even if the agreement is signed, the
   quarrel over Serbia's future in Europe will continue--for if the EU
   sends its mission to Kosovo, Mr Kostunica's party could then block
   parliamentary ratification of the SAA. Serbia's long slog towards
   normality never seems to end.

