
   Poland does not see why the European Union should stop it burning coal

   THE Polish economy is growing fast, despite the global slowdown. That
   means it is consuming more energy. But the government has no real
   energy policy--so the country will end up using more coal, with all
   that implies for carbon emissions.

   As it happens, the biggest worry about energy in Poland is not carbon
   but the Nord Stream pipeline, which is due to pump Russian gas
   directly to Germany under the Baltic Sea, bypassing Poland. Polish
   objections are not, as in Sweden, about the environmental risks;
   rather, the Poles fear Russia may exploit its direct access to Germany
   to divide Europe. All Polish politicians oppose the project. Lech
   Kaczynski, Poland's president, hoped last year to forge an alliance
   with four ex-Soviet states to help Poland diversify its energy sources
   away from Russia. But the president of petro-pumping Kazakhstan,
   Nursultan Nazarbayev, pulled out, cancelling his trip to a
   Polish-sponsored energy summit.

   Nuclear-power policy is no more successful. An agreement between
   Poland and the three Baltic countries to build a nuclear-power plant
   on the site of a former Soviet reactor in Lithuania has not yet been
   signed. The Poles are unhappy that the Lithuanians are offering them
   less than the 1,200 megawatts of electricity they need for the project
   to make economic sense. Another idea is to build a nuclear-power plant
   in Poland itself, its first. But this is unpopular with Poles, who
   recall the Chernobyl disaster in Ukraine.

   So attention returns to coal. Waldemar Pawlak, the economy minister,
   has declared his love for the black stuff and, partly in response to
   record oil prices, has even called for greater emphasis on it. Poland
   depends on coal for some 95% of its electricity. But the European
   Union's ambitious plans to cut carbon-dioxide emissions by 20% by 2020
   and to boost renewable energy are raising questions over coal. The
   Poles have already taken the European Commission to court over their
   emissions allowance, which they say is unreasonably low. This clash
   will continue, as all EU members seek higher emissions allowances and
   lower targets for renewables (see [3]article).

   Poland will inevitably continue to rely heavily on coal, says Jerzy
   Buzek, an engineer who served as prime minister in 1997-2001 and is
   now a member of the European Parliament. The country has the biggest
   coal reserves in the European Union (see chart). The government
   supports the development of technology to make it cleaner and more
   efficient to burn coal, but that is not yet available. Mr Buzek pins
   his hopes on techniques to liquefy or gasify coal, but they are not
   yet developed. The capture and storage of carbon emissions underground
   is another possibility, but has yet to be used on any scale. And it
   could send the cost of coal soaring.

   Next week, the commission will propose its emissions targets. Like
   others in eastern Europe, the Poles think the problem has been caused
   by richer countries. But as the biggest EU member in the region, they
   need an energy policy, too.

