
                                                                       AP

                                     AP

   Italian anti-Americanism costs Romano Prodi his job 

   THE parliamentary tornado that ripped through Romano Prodi's
   centre-left government on February 21st, prompting its leader to
   resign, showed how dangerous it can be for a European government to be
   seen to be backing the Bush administration. The same day Tony Blair,
   George Bush's closest ally, announced the departure of some British
   troops from Iraq, Italy's prime minister was humiliated in a crucial
   parliamentary vote, centring on Italy's involvement in Afghanistan.

   As President Giorgio Napolitano began consulting party representatives
   on a possible replacement for the prime minister, the cause of Mr
   Prodi's troubles looked more significant than their immediate result.
   Rather than forcing Italy's long-suffering voters back to the polls
   (this was the 61st government since 1945) the president was expected
   to try for a cabinet headed by someone more widely acceptable in
   parliament, or even for a remodelled Prodi administration. The
   outgoing coalition's core parties quickly said they would support Mr
   Prodi again.

   Mr Prodi actually won the vote in Italy's Senate by 158 votes to 136
   with 24 abstentions. But abstentions count as votes against, so the
   formal result was a two-vote defeat. It was not, technically, a
   confidence vote, so Mr Prodi did not need to step down. But his
   foreign minister, Massimo D'Alema, had just said that defeat would
   mean it was time for "everyone to go home". Exultant representatives
   of the centre-right, which is led by the media proprietor and former
   prime minister, Silvio Berlusconi, pounced on his undertaking. Holding
   aloft a copy of a newspaper headlining the pledge, Mr Berlusconi's
   chief whip in the upper house cried: "There is no Prodi government any
   more. The Prodi government has fallen in this chamber." When news
   reached the lower house, the Chamber of Deputies, scuffles broke out
   between government and opposition. Over a hundred people gathered
   outside Mr Prodi's office chanting "Resign, resign".

   Behind the defeat lay profound divisions over foreign policy within Mr
   Prodi's government. In recent weeks two largely separate issues have
   become perilously entwined. One is Italy's contribution to
   Afghanistan's International Security Assistance Force (ISAF). Since Mr
   Prodi pulled Italian forces out of Iraq last year, the left-most
   members of his sprawling, nine-party coalition, which includes Greens,
   Christian centrists, ex-communists and radical leftists, have
   increasingly focused their attention on ISAF. Though the mission has a
   United Nations mandate, it is NATO-run, jarring the Italian left's
   strong pacifist and anti-American sensibilities. Three ministers
   walked out of the cabinet rather than sign off extra funding for the
   Afghan force, which has yet to be endorsed by parliament.

   Amid growing concern about Italy's wobbly commitment to ISAF, the
   ambassadors of six other participants published an open letter,
   appealing for continued support. That may have backfired: Mr D'Alema,
   a staunch backer of ISAF, angrily dismissed the move as interference
   by outsiders in Italy's democracy. The Chamber of Deputies, where the
   government has a bigger majority, was due to start debating the
   funding on February 26th; it must go to the Senate by mid-March. That
   is why a reckoning in parliament on the government's foreign policy
   had become urgently needed.

   The day before the Senate vote, Mr Prodi sealed a deal with the
   majority of the doubters in his camp by promising to use a meeting on
   Afghanistan in Rome, due by May, to prepare a future peace conference
   (to which some on the left would like to invite the Taliban). But this
   proved too little for two far-left senators, who withheld their votes.

   They and other radicals were equally exercised by the government's
   readiness to agree to the expansion of an American military base at
   Vicenza in northern Italy. On February 17th, some 70,000
   people--including leading figures in the governing coalition--marched
   in protest at the plan. Mr Prodi swiftly declared that he did not
   intend changing a 50 year-old defence policy, based on the three
   pillars of the European Union, the UN and NATO.

   Fine words. But barely a week later, that once-uncontroversial
   approach to Italy's alliances had ended in disaster. The implications
   go beyond foreign policy. The outgoing government had an urgent
   domestic reform agenda. A crisis like this, even if it leads to a
   remodelled Prodi government, raises big questions once more over the
   ability of a humbled and disconcerted centre-left to push through the
   painful changes that Italy needs.

