
                                                                      AFP

                                    AFP

   At half-time, the grand coalition seems subdued--maybe too much so


   THE interval is over, and the actors in Germany's grand coalition have
   come back onstage. The script for the next two years calls for the
   Christian Democrats (CDU) and Social Democrats (SPD) to live together
   until they disband to fight each other in a federal election by
   September 2009. But it is between the lines that one finds the real
   plot: complacency and angst, meaning that the second act will hardly
   be action-packed (unless terrorism strikes, see [4]article).

   The government's goals, says the CDU chancellor, Angela Merkel, are to
   "strengthen the bases of the economic upswing" and "leave nobody
   behind." Yet unlike France's president, Nicolas Sarkozy, Ms Merkel has
   no big plans to achieve them. Boosting long-term growth would take
   painful reforms that appeal to few, especially when the economy seems
   to be doing fine without them. There is more talk of inclusion, but
   the parties disagree over how to deliver it. Both are committed to
   eliminating the federal budget deficit by 2011, ruling out big
   spending. "Over the next two years there will be lots of symbolic
   gestures and nothing real," predicts Klaus Zimmermann, president of
   DIW, an economic research institute in Berlin.

   For now, symbolism may suffice. Exports are booming, unemployment is
   falling and the economy may grow by some 2.5% in 2007 and 2008, its
   best performance in years. In the first half of 2007 the public sector
   overall recorded a surplus for the first time since unification in
   1990. Yet the mood of the three coalition partners (the CDU's Bavarian
   ally, the Christian Social Union, is the third) is jittery. In January
   their popularity will be tested in elections in two important states,
   Hesse and Lower Saxony. Bavaria votes in September 2008.

   The SPD is especially nervous. Voters have not forgiven the party for
   the cuts in unemployment benefits made under Ms Merkel's predecessor,
   Gerhard Schröder. The Left Party, a new party formed by the
   ex-communists and some left-wing defectors from the SPD, is luring
   away traditional supporters. Further liberalising reforms would be
   electoral poison.

   Ms Merkel's coalition-management skills create an illusion of
   progress. At a recent get-together in a Prussian palace, the cabinet
   found enough common ground to produce 12 pages of promises, but even
   the best are only timid steps in the right direction. For example,
   from November Germany will open its job market to foreign engineering
   students at German universities and to engineers from all 12 new
   members of the European Union. And the payroll tax to finance
   unemployment benefits will be trimmed from 4.2% to 3.9% to encourage
   hiring.

   More might have been hoped for from a coalition with a big majority
   and a strong economy. The opening to foreign engineers will ease but
   not resolve a labour shortage that costs industry an estimated EUR20
   billion ($27 billion) in lost output a year. All the other old EU
   members bar Austria have either opened their labour markets fully to
   easterners already, or plan to do so by 2009. Holger Schmieding, an
   economist at Bank of America, reckons that the government could afford
   to cut unemployment-insurance contributions to 3%, which might create
   250,000 new jobs.

   The government has bravely introduced a gradual increase in the
   retirement age (to 67), but it has been less bold in restructuring the
   health system, which threatens to gobble up an ever rising share of
   GDP at the expense of investment in education and infrastructure. It
   has no plans to tackle the network of regulations that makes it
   expensive to fire workers, and thus risky to hire them. A second
   instalment of Germany's federal redesign, which would limit states'
   debts but allow them to raise (or lower) taxes, may just squeak
   through.

   In place of reform, the coalition offers comforting but vague
   promises. There will be help for the working poor in higher child
   benefits and subsidies to childless households. The number of school
   drop-outs will be cut by half by 2010. A bonus will be paid to firms
   that train more people than average. Workers in soon-to-be-liberalised
   postal services will get a minimum wage (which the SPD would like to
   extend across the economy). The government may help states to finance
   more crèches for children; it has mooted the idea of ten days' paid
   leave for workers to arrange nursing for sick parents. Such
   benevolence carries "clear social-democratic handwriting", boasts the
   vice-chancellor (and labour minister), Franz Müntefering.

   Yet to his dismay, it is Ms Merkel who gets the credit. In most polls,
   the CDU is ten points ahead of the hapless SPD, which remains divided
   over whether to defend Mr Schröder's reforms and over its own role in
   the coalition.

   The SPD has championed the coalition's boldest policy, an "integrated
   energy and climate programme" aimed at cutting Germany's
   greenhouse-gas emissions by 40% from 1990 levels by 2020. But Ms
   Merkel is its most visible defender. The foreign minister,
   Frank-Walter Steinmeier, is from the SPD (he was Mr Schröder's chief
   of staff), but it was the chancellor who lectured her hosts about
   human rights on a trip to China last month. Such stances help to make
   Ms Merkel appealing to the Greens, who could yet be an alternative to
   the SPD as a coalition partner.

   The odds remain that both the economic upswing and the coalition will
   survive until the 2009 election. But there are risks to both. As so
   often, German banks have suffered disproportionately from the subprime
   mortgage mess in America (see [5]article). If the American economy
   buckles, Germany's export-led growth could quickly fade. And the SPD
   may yet be tempted to bail out of the coalition rather than go on
   seeing Ms Merkel gather both credit and strength.

