
   The real crisis in Naples is about governance as much as rubbish

                                                                       AP
                                                                       AP

                                                      Waste not, want not

   GARBAGE littered on city streets can be not only unhealthy, but also
   politically hazardous. It reminds voters of the fragility of
   civilisation--and can prompt them to turn on their elected
   representatives. Uncollected rubbish helped to undermine the Labour
   government of James Callaghan in Britain's "winter of discontent" in
   1978-79.

   So it is at first sight surprising that Romano Prodi's centre-left
   government should have let the situation in Campania, the region round
   Naples, get so smelly. By January 8th some 60,000 tonnes of garbage
   were piled up in the streets, roughly 5,000 tonnes of it in Naples
   itself. At a rubbish dump outside the city, residents opposed to its
   reopening were fighting nightly battles with the police.

   This crisis is as much about governance as about garbage. It did not
   blow up overnight. Campania has been plagued by refuse trouble for 14
   years. Almost EUR8 billion ($11 billion) has been spent on it. The
   region's garbage collectors stopped their rounds on December 21st,
   because the dumps in and around Naples were full, and an incinerator
   that should have been ready was not. Both developments were wholly
   foreseeable. The centre-left mayor of Naples, Rosa Russo Jervolino,
   warned Mr Prodi of the looming crisis a year ago. Yet nothing was
   done.

   The underlying problem is that Campania has no modern incinerators.
   This is because plans to build them have met determined, and often
   aggressive, opposition from local people. Their protests are
   frequently backed, if not orchestrated, by Campania's powerful
   organised-crime group, the Camorra, which makes succulent profits from
   disposing of waste in illegal dumps (see [3]article). But many
   Neapolitans are genuinely concerned about emissions from the proposed
   incinerators. There has been criticism of their design; and, since
   barely one-eighth of the city's garbage is separated before it is
   collected, there are fears that toxic waste could be burnt along with
   harmless stuff.

   Mr Prodi first sent in the army to clear the garbage from outside
   schools, so that they could reopen after the holiday. Then on January
   8th he announced a set of new measures. He appointed a special
   commissioner, a former national police chief, Gianni De Gennaro, with
   sweeping powers to tackle the garbage mountain. He was given a 120-day
   mandate and guaranteed continued help from the army. Mr Prodi also
   promised three new incinerators and "enough" new landfill sites. He
   gave local authorities four months to bring in segregated collection.
   Otherwise, they will be put under special administration.

   Mr Prodi had earlier said that he intended to solve the Naples garbage
   problem permanently. His plan could do this--if it is carried out. But
   some scepticism is surely in order. Mr De Gennaro is at least the
   seventh Campanian "refuse tsar". The prime minister offered no
   deadline for completing the incinerators, which take some three years
   to build. Nor did he say how he proposed to overcome local opposition
   to the creation of dumps, which can be fiercer even than resistance to
   the building of incinerators.

   At least one measure announced by Mr Prodi will have an immediate
   impact. Other Italian regions are to be allowed to take some of
   Campania's waste. But this is at odds with both Italian and European
   Union legislation (the European Commission is already threatening
   legal proceedings against Italy over Naples's garbage). Mr Prodi
   called it a short-term expedient to allow longer-term measures to be
   enacted. But nothing has proved more elusive in Campania's protracted
   waste crisis than long-term solutions.

