
                                                                      AFP

                                    AFP

   The implications of a diplomatic shift in an important oil-rich region


   WHEN God was parcelling out land to the peoples of the earth, the
   Georgians arrived late. But their explanation--that they had been
   drinking in his honour--so delighted God that, according to a Georgian
   creation myth, he granted them the world's choicest spot. The gods
   have indeed favoured Georgia this winter, bestowing a mild one when a
   harsh one might have been disastrous. But the Georgians owe thanks
   also to an earthly benefactor: their neighbour Azerbaijan, whose
   oil-fuelled foreign policy is transforming the volatile but vital
   Caucasus.

   Since the revolution of 2003 that swept Mikhail Saakashvili to
   Georgia's presidency, his yen to join NATO and the European Union has
   infuriated the Kremlin. Last autumn, the Russians imposed postal and
   aviation blockades, alongside the existing embargoes on Georgia's
   water, wine and fruit. Then, with winter approaching, they doubled the
   price for Russian gas--in theory for commercial reasons, but with the
   real aim of taming Mr Saakashvili.

   Yet, for all Mr Saakashvili's high-profile rambunctiousness, the most
   important country in the Caucasus is Azerbaijan. With around 8m
   people, most of them Shia Muslims, it has the biggest population. It
   also has oil and gas, which a consortium led by BP is extracting from
   the Caspian Sea and pumping through new pipelines across Georgia to
   Turkey and beyond. All the Caucasian economies are now picking up,
   after collapsing with the Soviet Union--even corrupt Armenia's,
   dependent though it mostly is on remittances. But the growth created
   by Azerbaijan's second oil boom (the first was 100 years ago) was the
   highest in the world last year: 34.5%, says the finance minister.

   Azerbaijan's president is Ilham Aliev, who inherited the job from
   Heidar, his strongman father. The younger Aliev seemed also to have
   inherited the Caucasian skill of diplomatic balance, eschewing
   Georgian-style pyrotechnics. But that careful equilibrium appeared to
   change in December, when the Russians tried to hike the price of the
   gas that, despite its own reserves, Azerbaijan was itself still
   importing. The idea was apparently to stop Azerbaijan helping the
   Georgians with cheaper supplies.

   "Commercial blackmail," said Mr Aliev. Azerbaijan stopped importing
   Russian gas altogether--and, thanks to the warm weather, gas from
   Azerbaijan seems set to help Georgia through the winter. Elmar
   Mammadyarov, Azerbaijan's foreign minister, says his country is merely
   "taking responsibility as a regional leader." Mr Saakashvili is more
   exuberant: "a geopolitical coup", he says of the new gas arrangements.
   The truth is, Mr Aliev now needs Mr Saakashvili too. Azerbaijan's
   future, and Mr Aliev's power, rest on the new pipelines, which have
   bound their two countries together, and bound both of them to the
   West. In a few years they may also carry Kazakh oil from the other
   side of Caspian, and--perhaps--gas from Turkmenistan. That would undo
   Russia's grip on the supply of Central Asian gas to Europe, and is as
   unpopular an idea in Moscow as it is welcome elsewhere.

   Two things undermine the hope that the fractious Caucasians have
   finally learned to hang together, to their own benefit and that of
   Western energy consumers.

   One is domestic politics. Russia's diplomatic power may be waning, but
   its political model remains popular. Armen Darbinian, a former
   Armenian prime minister, quips that his and other post-Soviet
   countries have become "one-and-a-half party states": a party of power,
   plus others that are basically decorative. In Azerbaijan, opposition
   activists are regularly harassed and locked up. Like Russia, Georgia,
   Armenia and Azerbaijan will all hold presidential polls next year. Mr
   Aliev will surely win his; the whisper in Baku is that his wife will
   take over next. But another whisper is that, in the absence of
   democracy, Islamism is on the rise--encouraged, say some, by Iran to
   the south.

   The Islamists, says Ali Kerimli, a disgruntled oppositionist, curry
   favour with their complaint that "the West sells democracy for oil."
   Others say the threat is fanciful. The call to prayer rings across the
   boutiques and restaurants of downtown Baku, but there are actually
   more hijabs on the streets of London, says Ilgar Ibrahimoglu, an imam.
   All the same, things may change if too much of the oil money goes into
   nepotistic contracts and vanity projects, and too little on
   diversifying the economy and easing the grinding poverty in which many
   Azerbaijanis still live.

   The other big Caucasian danger is war. Russian support for South
   Ossetia and Abkhazia, two enclaves that broke away from Georgia in the
   1990s (see map), is one of Mr Saakashvili's main gripes. Azerbaijan
   also lost a secessionist conflict over Nagorno Karabakh, a part of
   Soviet Azerbaijan mostly populated by Armenians. Mr Aliev periodically
   makes dark threats about retaking Azerbaijan's lost territory by
   force, though a flare-up in Georgia currently looks likelier.

   Mr Saakashvili says Russia's economic embargo "achieved the opposite
   of what was intended", and that Georgia has found new markets.
   Suitably cheered, he this week hosted Mr Aliev and Turkey's Recep
   Tayyip Erdogan, shaking hands on a new railway that will link the
   Caucasus to Europe--but miss out Armenia. Vartan Oskanian, Armenia's
   foreign minister, complains that there is an existing railway across
   Armenian-controlled territory that could be used instead. The railway,
   like the pipelines, symbolises what the countries of the Caucasus can
   achieve together, but also how far apart they remain.

