
   After one year, Romano Prodi's government looks surprisingly stable

   GOVERNMENTS elected for five years seldom brag about surviving for
   one. But Romano Prodi's centre-left coalition, which will mark its
   first birthday next week, has good reason to celebrate.

   If ever an infant needed incubation, it was Mr Prodi's administration
   a year ago. His "Union" spans an ideological range from neo-Trotskyist
   to quasi-Thatcherite. It began life with a majority of just one
   elected representative in the Senate, the upper house, which has equal
   power with the Chamber of Deputies. In February it almost came to
   grief over foreign policy, scraping through a confidence vote thanks
   to a rebellion by two opposition senators. Yet three months later it
   looks quite safe.

   This week, the European Commission raised its forecast for Italian
   economic growth in 2007 to 1.9%. It said it expected Italy's
   once-troublesome budget deficit to come in at only 2.1% of GDP, well
   under the euro-area ceiling of 3%. And it predicted that the country's
   debt burden would be trimmed by 1.8 points from 2006, to 105% of GDP.

   There are three secrets to Mr Prodi's survival, besides the improving
   economy. The first is technical. Not all Italian senators are elected.
   Seven are life senators. Of the five who attend regularly, four
   usually vote with the centre-left, giving the government a bigger
   majority than it appears to have on paper.

   The second reason for Mr Prodi's survival is the similar durability of
   his arch-enemy, Silvio Berlusconi, as the centre-right opposition
   leader. The media tycoon's five scandal-ridden years in office, which
   ended in his narrow electoral defeat last spring, traumatised the
   centre-left. If there is one thing that stops its otherwise querulous
   leaders from bringing down the government, it is the horror of being
   seen to usher Mr Berlusconi back into power.

   One of Mr Berlusconi's own allies is helping to avoid that. Since the
   election, Pier Ferdinando Casini, leader of the Union of Christian
   Democrats (UDC), has partly detached his party from Mr Berlusconi's
   House of Liberties alliance, backing the government on causes it
   supports, such as keeping a military presence in Afghanistan. The UDC
   leader dislikes Mr Berlusconi's more confrontational tactics. But he
   also wants to replace him, and calculates that the longer the
   government stays in office, the less likely it is that Mr Berlusconi
   will be the centre-right's candidate at the next election, due in
   2011, by which time il Cavaliere will be 74.

   Mr Prodi's third secret is that most essential political attribute:
   luck. He came to office spooked by a widening budget deficit into
   thinking the fiscal situation was dire. He and his finance minister,
   Tommaso Padoa-Schioppa, set about passing a belt-tightening
   mini-budget and then a full 2006 budget that raised taxes and, to a
   lesser extent, cut spending. Yet it soon became clear that cash was
   pouring into the treasury. This was partly because the economy was
   benefiting from a Europe-wide upswing, but it was also because one-off
   measures passed under Mr Berlusconi proved to have enduring effects,
   by bringing to light previously undeclared sources of tax revenue.

   Indeed, Mr Prodi is under pressure from all directions over how to use
   the windfall. The European Commission wants Italy's still formidable
   debt to be cut. The left of his coalition wants to reduce the big gap
   in Italy between rich and poor. The right would prefer to use the cash
   to cut taxes. The resulting tensions could yet sink Mr Prodi's
   unexpectedly durable coalition. But, as he will recall from the
   painful euro-qualifying 1990s, there are worse problems than having
   too much money.

