
   The coalition at last gives up the ghost and prepares for a new
   election


   THE Polish government has imploded. The ruling Law and Justice Party
   has decided to press for an election this autumn, perhaps as early as
   October. The coalition's demise has been long drawn-out and it will
   not be mourned. But the antics of Poland's politicians may not
   encourage high voter turn-out--and even an election might not bring
   much improvement.

   The three coalition parties are busily blaming each other for bringing
   the government down. The prime minister, Jaroslaw Kaczynski, has now
   summarily dismissed all four ministers from the junior parties,
   including a deputy prime minister. Their replacements have improved
   the government "both intellectually and morally", he declared. He
   started the ball rolling a month ago by sacking Andrzej Lepper,
   another deputy prime minister and agriculture minister who heads the
   Self-Defence party and was implicated in a bribery scandal. Next to go
   was the interior minister, sacked for allegedly leaking information
   against Mr Lepper, pitting both men against the zealous justice
   minister, Zbigniew Ziobro.

   The coalition was never a dream ticket. Law and Justice, a party set
   up by Mr Kaczynski and his twin brother Lech, who is now president,
   won the 2005 election on an anti-communist, anti-corruption platform.
   This sat uneasily with its alliance with Self-Defence, best known for
   cronyism and murky business connections. The other junior partner, the
   League of Polish Families, attracted ridicule for such acts as seeking
   an investigation of "Teletubbies", a children's TV programme, because
   one of the characters might be a homosexual.

   Law and Justice had some good ideas, but their implementation was
   messy. Its main goal was to clean up the sleaze of the previous
   (ex-communist) Socialist government. But the party resorted to
   unappealing methods. In trying to uproot all traces of links to the
   old communist regime, it created a situation in which loyalty was
   prized above competence. Earlier this year, a colleague of Lech
   Kaczynski's from his time as Warsaw mayor replaced Leszek Balcerowicz,
   widely seen as the creator of Poland's modern economy, as governor of
   the central bank. The independence of the judiciary and the civil
   service have both been undermined. A negative verdict by the
   constitutional court on a vetting law was attacked by a Law and
   Justice deputy who, it seems, was asked to find compromising material
   on the judges.

   Not everything the government has done is bad. It shut the old
   military-intelligence service, which became a cosy meeting-place for
   ex-communist spooks. With the help of a good regional minister, its
   use of money from Brussels, worth some EUR67 billion ($90 billion)
   between now and 2013, has become more efficient. The finance minister
   has struggled valiantly to keep Poland's budget deficit under control,
   resisting the spending demands of her colleagues. Yet on balance the
   government's record is poor. The cabinet is a hopeless lot: the only
   two members with international standing, the foreign and defence
   ministers, were both forced out to be replaced by Kaczynski cronies.
   Poland's relations with her European Union partners have been scratchy
   at best.

   Sadly, the opposition is little better. On the right, Civic Platform
   often lapses into a testy defensiveness rather than promoting its own
   policies. It has a lead in the polls, but would need a partner to form
   a government. Despite also being on the right, Law and Justice is an
   unlikely choice on personality grounds. The alternative may be the
   Democratic Left Alliance, successor to the Socialists. Yet though
   revamped by a former president, Aleksander Kwasniewski, and led by a
   media-savvy 33-year-old, it remains taboo to both centre-right
   parties. Its support is needed for a two-thirds majority to dissolve
   parliament, however.

   Some observers fret that the outcome could once more put Law and
   Justice just ahead of Civic Platform, leaving it to scrabble for a
   humbler partner among smaller parties. That might be good for the
   Kaczynskis, but not for Poland--nor for the EU.

