
   Not enough help from the neighbours


   WINTER in Albania, Europe's second-poorest country (after Moldova), is
   a wretched season, bringing power-cuts of 12 hours a day in the cities
   and 20 hours in the countryside. Hence the brisk import each autumn of
   portable oil-fired generators: without their own private electricity
   supply, the thousands of small businesses that drive the economy would
   collapse.

   This year the electricity shortage is worse than usual. A drought has
   severely reduced water levels in dams that feed the elderly
   hydro-power plants along the Drin river in the north of the country.
   Thirty years ago these were the pride of the late Enver Hoxha's
   Stalinist regime: Albania even exported electricity to Greece and
   Yugoslavia.

   Now the situation is reversed: electricity demand is growing at almost
   three times the European average as more Albanians move to the cities
   and furnish their homes with dishwashers, tumble-dryers and electric
   heaters--paid for by remittances from relatives working abroad. KESh,
   the inefficient and corrupt state electricity utility, struggles to
   send bills to, and collect money from, people living without addresses
   or electricity meters in squatter suburbs around Tirana.

   Albania used to get by with free or heavily subsidised electricity
   imports from Italy, its friendliest neighbour, and with cheap supplies
   from Bulgaria, the region's biggest exporter. But last month two
   Chernobyl-era units were shut down at Kozloduy, Bulgaria's
   nuclear-power complex on the Danube, as a condition of Bulgaria's
   accession to the European Union. That has led to Bulgaria cutting
   electricity exports by more than two-thirds--and so to soaring energy
   prices in the Balkans. Meanwhile, Albania's electricity shortage is
   showing up in slower economic growth and less foreign investment than
   elsewhere in the western Balkans.

   In an attempt to find a solution, the World Bank, Italian energy
   companies and private consultancies have come up with a stream of
   proposals to modernise hydro-power plants, reduce transmission losses
   and build new power stations close to fast-growing towns in the centre
   and south of the country. But only one large project has made
   progress. After several years of foot-dragging by the energy ministry,
   an Italian company has won a tender to build a 100-megawatt oil-fired
   plant at Vlore in Albania's south. It should start producing
   electricity in 2010.

   With local elections due on February 18th, Sali Berisha, the prime
   minister, is under attack for letting the lights go out. Voters are
   poised to punish his Democratic Party for not delivering on its
   promise at the general election in 2005 to clean up KESh and provide
   cheap, year-round power. Last month he made a joint appeal with Sergey
   Stanishev, his Bulgarian counterpart, for units 3 and 4 at Kozloduy to
   stay open (units 1 and 2 are already closed; units 5 and 6 are more
   modern and safer). Bulgarians argue in Brussels that Balkan countries
   need as much energy as the region can produce if they are to grow
   faster.

   Andris Piebalgs, the EU energy commissioner, is not convinced. On
   February 1st he told Mr Berisha that instead of teaming up with the
   Bulgarians to demand special treatment he should do more to sort
   things out at home. This was not quite the pre-election response Mr
   Berisha had been hoping for.

