
   From Vladimir Putin (front) to Dmitry Medvedev (behind): a very
   Russian way to change the political guard

                                                                      AFP

                                    AFP


   VLADIMIR PUTIN likes to surprise. But this time he has excelled
   himself, making a surprise out of something that is not surprising at
   all. Dmitry Medvedev, a 42-year-old lawyer chosen by Mr Putin to be
   Russia's next president, was always a front-runner. That Mr Putin may
   become his prime minister was also floated two months ago. Yet nobody
   expected Mr Putin simply to do what he had said.

   The choice of Mr Medvedev was first flagged in November 2005, when the
   publicity-shy head of the Kremlin administration was entrusted with
   billions of dollars for social projects and promoted to deputy prime
   minister. A day later Mr Medvedev, in his first big speech, promised a
   better life for ordinary Russians. A year on, when he spoke at the
   World Economic Forum in Davos, he was favoured by 35% of Russians for
   president. "Here was born the future president of Russia," somebody
   scratched in the doorway of Mr Medvedev's old apartment block in St
   Petersburg.

   But then Mr Putin, as befits a former KGB officer, started covering
   his tracks. He raised Sergei Ivanov, the defence minister and another
   ex-KGB man, to the same position as Mr Medvedev. Television mentions
   of Mr Ivanov shot up; soon 37% of Russians said they were ready to
   vote for him. Mr Ivanov was more in tune with Mr Putin's anti-Western
   sabre-rattling. Yet on the day that a leading Russian newspaper tipped
   Mr Ivanov as next prime minister, Mr Putin pulled off another surprise
   by appointing the little-known Viktor Zubkov. He surprised again by
   announcing that he would lead the pro-Kremlin United Russia party in
   the parliamentary election on December 2nd. He suggested that a big
   United Russia win might tempt him to become prime minister, perhaps
   under a pliable Mr Zubkov.

   Then the infighting in the Kremlin started to get out of hand and Mr
   Putin returned to his original plan of making Mr Medvedev president.
   This brought both surprise and relief. Mr Putin's talk of enemies of
   the people and his beating up and jailing of demonstrators were
   followed by the arrest of a liberal deputy finance minister. In the
   circumstances, the choice of a soft-spoken, civilian lawyer seemed a
   palm of peace. Compared with Mr Ivanov and Mr Zubkov, he looks
   liberal. The reaction was that it could have been much worse.
   Germany's Angela Merkel, who criticised Russia's parliamentary
   election, telephoned to say she could work well with Mr Medvedev. But
   it is not Mr Medvedev she may have to work with. For the next day, in
   a final surprise, Mr Medvedev invited Mr Putin to be his prime
   minister.

   The truth is that Mr Medvedev is not an independent politician, but an
   extension of Mr Putin. He comes from Mr Putin's native St Petersburg
   and studied law at the same university. He worked alongside Mr Putin
   in St Petersburg's mayoral office and has not left his side since. In
   Moscow he ran Mr Putin's presidential campaign and chaired Gazprom,
   the gas giant. He was Mr Putin's chief of staff and legal consigliere.
   He is 13 years younger and a few inches shorter, but also a lot less
   confident.

   Mr Medvedev does not come from the siloviki, ex-members of the
   security services who control so much of Mr Putin's Russia; his
   loyalty to Mr Putin is personal. He belongs to what was once the
   Soviet intelligentsia, and is more interested in business than
   rockets. He did not support the arrest of Mikhail Khodorkovsky, an
   oligarch who challenged Mr Putin, and even questioned the prosecutor's
   tactics. Nor does he subscribe to the Kremlin's notion of "sovereign
   democracy". Democracy, he has said, does not need qualifications.

   Yet Andrei Illarionov, a former adviser to Mr Putin and now one of his
   fiercest critics, says it is ridiculous to call Mr Medvedev a liberal.
   When Mr Medvedev was the Kremlin chief of staff, he banned members of
   the administration from talking to the press. Mr Illarionov, who
   frequently broke this order, was reprimanded. The danger, Mr
   Illarionov says, is that Mr Medvedev may try to overcompensate for his
   lack of a security background.

   If Mr Medvedev has liberal instincts, the best way to show them would
   be to run a free and fair presidential election. So far, his big
   selling point is that he is really a Putin-2. The day after he was
   anointed, Mr Medvedev made a televised statement. Reading from an
   autocue, and even imitating Mr Putin's voice and style, he declared:
   "I consider it of utmost importance for our country to keep Vladimir
   Vladimirovich Putin in the highest post of executive power, the post
   of head of government of the Russian Federation."

   The Kremlin line is that the teamwork between Mr Putin as prime
   minister and Mr Medvedev as president will guarantee stability,
   creating a good base for more liberal reforms. Mr Putin has hinted
   that more state companies will, sooner or later, be privatised. So
   far, this has sounded more like a redistribution of property, rather
   than liberal reform.

   As for Mr Putin, he seems still to be keeping his options open. If he
   becomes prime minister it is hard to imagine him answering to Mr
   Medvedev. Whatever the form, Mr Putin will be more popular and more
   powerful than his protégé. Under the constitution, the president has
   control over the army and the security services, but this could easily
   be changed by a parliamentary vote. In any event Mr Putin is unlikely
   to part with power. More surprises could be in store, even the revival
   of a once-touted plan for a union with Belarus that might let Mr Putin
   stay president.

   The Kremlin's machinations have revealed a simple truth: that the
   authoritarian system created by Mr Putin in the past eight years does
   not allow an orderly transition of power from one elite to another.
   Kirill Rogov, a political analyst, points out that elections, which in
   a democratic society act as a mechanism for rotating power, have in
   Russia become a mechanism for preserving it.

   This reverses the biggest achievement of Boris Yeltsin's short-lived,
   imperfect democracy: a peaceful transfer of power. The manner in which
   Mr Yeltsin handed power to Mr Putin in December 1999 was not ideal,
   but he did step down and let somebody else take charge. Mr Putin seems
   unable to repeat that. Indeed, so as to hang on to power, he may be
   prepared to undermine the institution of a strong presidency that he
   helped to create.

   For all the talk of stability, Russia is in some ways less stable than
   it was. Mr Putin has been lucky to enjoy an oil boom that filled up
   state coffers and fanned economic growth. But the underlying economy
   has not been diversified or restructured. Inflation is running in
   double digits, domestic gas and electricity prices need to be raised
   and the outlook for the world economy is suddenly gloomier. Yet the
   biggest danger for Russia remains political.

   Russia has traditionally had only one centre of power: the Kremlin.
   There is but one precedent for a strong prime minister and a weak head
   of state. This was 100 years ago when Pyotr Stolypin was prime
   minister under Tsar Nicholas II. Stolypin dealt ruthlessly with
   political protesters to push through reforms to make Russia a leading
   European power. His catch-phrase was: give Russia 20 years of peace,
   and you will not recognise it. But it all ended badly. Stolypin was
   assassinated, Nicholas II murdered by the Bolsheviks--and Russia
   plunged into 73 years of communism.

