
   What strict national rules on shopping hours and sales reveal about
   European views of competition



   ARE you glum about brashly commercial holiday seasons? Annoyed when
   winter sales start earlier every year? Then Charlemagne has the place
   for you. Pick the right European country, and no sales pitches need
   disrupt your festive cheer. Try France, where sales will by law begin
   only on January 9th. Or Belgium: not only are sales banned before
   January 3rd but, under "pre-sales" rules, for six weeks beforehand
   shops cannot announce price reductions, lest somebody jumps the gun.

   During the twice-yearly pre-sales blackouts (there are also summer
   sales) a hundred inspectors from the Belgian economics ministry scour
   the country for advertisements, window stickers or price tags that
   even hint at discounts. A Prohibition-style speakeasy culture has
   sprung up in response. Gambits include putting question-marks on price
   tags and advertising "friendly prices". Chic boutiques in Brussels
   telephone favoured customers or send them "privilege cards", inviting
   them to pop in for an early visit. Controls must be "extremely severe"
   to ensure that the rules stick, explains Robert Geurts of the
   economics ministry, who glories in the title of director-general for
   regulation and organisation of the market. Inspectors receive many
   tips by telephone as rival shopkeepers denounce each other.

   If all this sounds fundamentally illiberal, that is because it is. One
   Eurocrat suggests that a key ancestor of many continental bans on
   unfair trading is a German law from the mid-1930s that sought to stamp
   out what Nazi officials called aggressive "Jewish" conduct among
   shopkeepers. But the laws also carry more than a whiff of distrust of
   capitalism itself. Belgian parliamentary papers from the late 1960s
   describe indignantly how some shops "deliberately" sell products at a
   loss to attract customers who might buy other goods at full price, a
   ploy referred to as "destructive" competition. Such loss-leaders were
   banned in Belgium in 1971, along with any selling below cost or at
   "extremely reduced" profit margins. This has kept the lawyers busy as
   the courts argue over what extremely reduced might mean. And that is
   why sales in Belgium are such a big deal: though offering discounts is
   legal at other times of the year, the sales are the only time when
   Belgian shopkeepers may sell goods at a loss.

   In Belgium, you cannot even tell customers to "buy one and get one
   free", as the maximum discount for multiple sales is 33%, or buy two
   and get a third thrown in. And sales are reserved for the "seasonal
   renewal" of stock. That means no goods may be specially bought in for
   the sales, and things deemed non-seasonal may not be put in sales. Cue
   more court cases: judges have established that sofas are seasonal but
   antiques are not.

   To distant observers, all this could add up to a picture of a country,
   indeed a continent, that is keener on the smothering embrace of state
   control than on the rigours of capitalism. Belgian shops are mostly
   obliged to close by 8pm every day; Sunday opening is rare. Price
   controls on bread were abolished only in 2004. Yet the true picture is
   both messier and more revealing of the forces that really hold Europe
   back.

   Reforms are possible in Europe, now a thoroughly capitalist continent.
   It is just that vested interests and coalition politics make the pace
   of change glacial. A European Commission proposal to liberalise sales
   promotions expired in 2005, killed by national governments. Yet in the
   past decade Germany and the Netherlands have trimmed or scrapped rules
   governing opening hours and trading practices. France still fixes
   sales periods and bans selling at a loss. But those rules have just
   been proposed for the scrapheap by a state-sponsored committee.

   Belgium has a pretty dynamic business sector (at least in
   Dutch-speaking Flanders). It has pulled off some quite big reforms
   over the years, despite a national inclination for cosy compromise.
   You should have tried the 1970s, says Mr Geurts cheerfully: "We really
   had price controls. There was a real desire to control everything."
   The government has just published a report by a lawyer, Herman De
   Bauw, urging the abolition of several obviously daft restrictions,
   including pre-sales blackout periods. Although he wrote much of the
   existing law, Mr Geurts himself admits that it is "showing its age".

   The power of vested interests

   But there will be opposition, led by the small shops and businesses
   that benefit from the weirdest trading laws. The pre-sales blackout on
   advertising discounts is a prime example. It was dreamt up in the
   1980s by centre-right politicians fearful that small businesses could
   not compete if big chains were allowed to go after bargain-hunters in
   an unregulated free-for-all. The blackout forbids publicising price
   cuts, but there is no matching ban on giving a customer a discount in
   the run-up to the sales, so long as they ask for one. It is no
   coincidence that haggling is possible in small shops, but harder in
   chain stores.

   Rules on fixed sales periods and selling below cost have come about in
   a similar way. Their target is explicit: big chains that are often
   accused in parliament of plotting to drive small businesses into
   extinction, so as to establish monopolies and raise prices at their
   ease. As the De Bauw report notes, this is a dubious argument. Fierce
   competition, it says, not monopolistic pricing, marks out Belgium's
   supermarkets.

   Belgians, like many other Europeans, appear genuinely attached to town
   centres filled with small shops, rather than the same old chains. Nor
   is there any great consumer pressure for longer shopping hours: many
   stores shut long before the legal closing time. Yet when Belgium's
   shopkeepers use their political clout to hold everybody to the same
   starting date for sales, or ban each other from setting their own
   prices, they are killing jobs and hurting customers. No wonder
   capitalism has such a mixed reputation in so much of Europe. Often it
   is not markets that are lacking, but free markets. And that is
   something to feel truly glum about.

