
   The Polish government is all tangled up in the past


   OUTSIDERS like to decry Poland's ruling twins, sometimes as buffoons,
   sometimes as bloodthirsty inquisitors. Both characterisations of Lech
   and Jaroslaw Kaczynski, respectively president and prime minister, are
   unfair, but each contains a grain of truth. The twins' foreign policy
   has been inept, sometimes comically so. And, until it was struck down
   by the constitutional court last week, their vetting law seemed not
   only sweeping, but downright sinister.

   Its aim was to screen 700,000 people for past collaboration with the
   communist-era secret police, including not only journalists and
   academics but also some (previously vetted) anti-communist
   politicians, such as Bronislaw Geremek, a former foreign minister. Mr
   Geremek refused to complete another vetting declaration, thereby
   risking his seat in the European Parliament. This prompted huge
   criticism: Daniel Cohn-Bendit, a Green colleague, said it was like
   "ordering a Jew in a concentration camp to submit a statement that he
   hasn't collaborated with the Nazis."

   The Kaczynskis' initial reaction was to counter-attack. At one point
   they and their allies even seemed to challenge the constitutional
   court's legitimacy. In a bizarre intervention on the day of its
   ruling, a deputy from the ruling Law and Justice party, Arkadiusz
   Mularczyk, demanded a delay, producing hurriedly obtained
   secret-police files on some of the judges. Now the government has
   accepted the court's ruling, which guts the central provisions of the
   law. Journalists and academics are excluded, and the penalty for
   non-compliance--a ten-year ban from a person's profession--was also
   struck down.

   This has avoided a constitutional crisis, but left the question of
   what to do with Poland's millions of locked-up secret-police files,
   which occupy 80km (50 miles) of shelf-space. Secrecy allows the wicked
   to pose as blameless, and offers much scope for blackmail. The
   emerging consensus is to replace the vetting law with an open-archive
   policy. One idea is to allow access by everyone to everything. Yet the
   files contain much private information, accurate or not, on things
   like medical conditions or sexual indiscretions.

   So a more likely answer will be to open the files to public scrutiny
   with non-political material expunged. But by whom? Some suspect that
   the whole subject will now get bogged down in the question of
   reforming the management of the archives, delaying embarrassing
   revelations for many years.

   Behind the row lie some sharply different views of history. The
   Kaczynskis believe that, after communism collapsed in 1989, the
   transition to democracy was botched--maybe even sabotaged--by elements
   from the old regime. They yearn to bust the crony-capitalist
   arrangements that have grown up between business, officialdom, the
   media and leftist politicians. Mr Geremek's 20-year stint in the
   opposition counts for little: how, critics ask, did he get the juicy
   job of running the Polish Cultural Centre in Paris in 1960, at the
   height of the cold war, without having ties to Polish (or Soviet)
   intelligence?

   Others say that the Kaczynskis themselves are prisoners of the
   suspicious, confrontational mindset engendered by totalitarianism.
   Justice is one thing; revenge another. Since 1989 Poland has tamed
   inflation and built a thriving market economy. Now it needs to
   modernise its public services and play a constructive role in Europe.
   Ending the heated controversy over the vetting law offers the best
   chance of concentrating on that.

