
   The most prominent Muslim minister causes a stir at home and abroad


   SHE was dressed in Dior for the dinner in honour of Nicolas Sarkozy at
   the White House, and seated at the king's table for the one in
   Morocco. She was in China with the French president last week, and at
   his side again this week for a state visit to Algeria. No other
   minister seems to follow the globe-trotting Mr Sarkozy as much as
   Rachida Dati, his justice minister, and none is so scrutinised by the
   French media.

                                                                  Eyevine
                                                                  Eyevine

                             The minister for justice, and foreign travel

   The first Muslim to hold such a top government job, and a woman to
   boot, Ms Dati has become emblematic of an effort to open up the French
   elite. This makes her controversial judicial reform a test of the new
   France in more ways than one.

   Ms Dati's backstory, as recounted in her recent book, "Je Vous Fais
   Juges" ("You be the Judge"), reads more like that of Barack Obama than
   the typical French minister. One of 12 children raised in a council
   flat by an illiterate Algerian mother and a Moroccan stonemason, she
   rose and qualified as a magistrate through a mix of tenacity,
   pushiness and hard work, including night shifts as a nursing
   auxiliary.

   She was adopted by Mr Sarkozy when he was interior minister (she had
   written to him cold, and demanded a meeting) and has worked in his
   team ever since. Since she was appointed rather than elected, Mr
   Sarkozy's centre-right party is seeking to boost her standing by
   putting her top of the list for the next municipal elections in the
   bourgeois 7th arrondissement of Paris. Ms Dati's ascent prompts as
   much admiration as it does resentment. Her appointment did not prevent
   another eruption of street violence in the heavily Muslim banlieues
   last month. In the same week that rioters torched cars, the country's
   justices also took to the streets during a strike to protest against
   her plans to amalgamate courts. Robert Badinter, a Socialist senator
   and former justice minister, said he had never seen "such anxiety and
   bitterness" from magistrates.

   Unpopular as it may be, the reform makes sense. The geography of the
   French court system has not changed in nearly half a century, despite
   huge population shifts. In largely rural areas, there is a tribunal de
   grande instance (county court) for fewer than 150,000 people; in big
   cities, one such court serves over 550,000. In Lorraine in eastern
   France, ten magistrates' courts employ a full-time judge without the
   workload to justify it, and two have none at all. By contrast, some
   city courts have vast backlogs. Ms Dati plans to close 178 of the 473
   magistrates' courts, and 23 county courts, and redistribute staff.

   Mr Sarkozy has made clear his desire to shake up the court system to
   speed up decisions, improve access and end the isolation of some
   investigating judges. An inquiry into one of France's most egregious
   recent miscarriages of justice--the imprisonment of 13 people
   wrongfully accused of running a paedophile ring in Outreau--said one
   cause was the fact that the investigating judge was working entirely
   alone.

   Naturally, magistrates affected by closures are enraged. Members of
   parliament, even those from Mr Sarkozy's party, have been fiercely
   critical of Ms Dati's plans too, accusing her of striking courts off
   the map without consultation. There also seems to be genuine concern
   about Ms Dati's management style. In her short time in office, more
   than half a dozen members of her staff have quit.

   The trouble for critics is that questions about Ms Dati's competence
   collide with France's awkward new political correctness. Charges of
   racism are already in the air. Dominique Sopo, head of SOS Racisme, an
   anti-discrimination group, says hostility to her reform is because she
   is "young, a woman, and of North African origin. Unfortunately, this
   profile creates resentment among a French elite made up of white men
   over 55."

   Still, other female members of the government too are said to have
   been put out by Ms Dati's prominence, not least the Senegalese-born
   Rama Yade, junior foreign minister for human rights, who was excluded
   from Mr Sarkozy's trip to China.

   Mr Sarkozy has stood solidly by Ms Dati throughout. Having publicly
   admired the ethnic diversity of the Bush administration in America, Mr
   Sarkozy is commendably keen to reproduce it in France. Indeed, given
   her iconic value, he cannot afford to let her fail.

