
   The Turks ponder a cross-border incursion into northern Iraq


   ON JUNE 6th a premature report of a big Turkish invasion of northern
   Iraq rocked markets. Certainly thousands of Turkish troops, backed by
   tanks and artillery, have massed for a possible offensive against
   Kurdish PKK rebels in Iraq. Martial law has been declared in three of
   Turkey's Kurdish provinces. This follows rising violence against
   soldiers in Turkey. On June 4th seven Turkish soldiers died when
   Kurdish rebels raided an outpost in the province of Tunceli. In May
   six civilians were killed by a suspected PKK suicide-bomber in Ankara.

   All this increases the pressure on Turkey's prime minister, Recep
   Tayyip Erdogan, to strike the PKK in its mountain strongholds in Iraq.
   General Yasar Buyukanit, chief of the general staff, has called a
   putative cross-border incursion "necessary" and "useful". Deniz
   Baykal, the main opposition leader, is in favour.

   But the American defence secretary, Robert Gates, said this week that
   the United States was squarely opposed to unilateral Turkish action,
   which would destabilise the only calmish bit of Iraq. The Americans
   would prefer the Turks to use the Iraqi Kurds to help them make peace
   with the PKK. The PKK itself wants to draw more Turkish forces into
   Iraq (the Turks have kept some 1,000 soldiers there since an incursion
   in the 1990s) because, as a source suggests, "this could provoke armed
   confrontation between Turkey and America." It would also upset the
   European Union.

   A few days before this week's alleged invasion, two American fighter
   jets had strayed from Iraq into Turkish airspace. The Americans said
   this was an "accident", but some Turks saw a warning that America
   might side with the Kurds against them. Yet most Americans acknowledge
   that their refusal to heed Turkish calls to attack the PKK is now the
   main cause of rampant anti-Americanism in Turkey. Catching a few PKK
   ringleaders could improve matters.

   The Iraqi Kurds are unwilling to co-operate mainly because they see
   the PKK as a bargaining chip to get the Turks to recognise their
   quasi-independent status in Iraq. The Turks are against a referendum
   in Kirkuk this December that might lead it to join the Kurdish region.

   Massoud Barzani, the Iraqi Kurdish leader, threatens trouble in
   Turkey's mostly Kurdish south-eastern provinces, where his popularity
   is now starting to rival that of the captured PKK leader, Abdullah
   Ocalan. Most Iraqi Kurds consider their quasi-independent state as the
   real target of any Turkish incursion. But after two decades of battle,
   some 16 cross-border incursions and 40,000 dead, Turkey's leaders,
   military and civilian alike, know that force alone cannot solve
   Turkey's Kurdish problem.

   The generals may have another reason for sabre-rattling. By insisting
   on government approval to strike in Iraq, they are shifting the blame
   for the violence to the Americans and the Iraqi Kurds--and to Mr
   Erdogan. With each Turkish casualty Mr Erdogan risks losing
   nationalist votes. Yet if he orders a full invasion, Turkey may just
   get bogged down and face new enemies.

