
   A surprising boost in revenues fuels a debate about tax cuts 

   BY THE standards of his predecessors, Tommaso Padoa-Schioppa, Italy's
   finance minister, is luck personified. Cash has rained into the
   treasury. In the first eight months of 2007, income- and corporate-tax
   receipts rose by 21%. The government says this is thanks to its
   clampdown on tax evasion. It reckons that EUR270 billion ($370
   billion), or a fifth of GDP, was going unpaid each year (95% of
   Italians claim to earn less than EUR40,000).

   Thwarted evasion, however, accounts for less than half the revenue
   increase. Another factor is that the economy is enjoying a rare spurt
   of growth: GDP is expected to rise by 2% this year. The opposition
   prefers to stress that Italians now pay more taxes at higher rates. Mr
   Padoa-Schioppa's first budget raised the top income-tax bracket to
   43%. For those who pay their due, Italy is now an onerous place. What
   is more, taxpayers get miserable value for money. Public spending in
   Italy is higher than in Germany, if lower than in France (see chart).
   But the clincher is that public-sector pay is high and the quality of
   public services is among the worst in Europe.

   That imbalance fuels growing impatience with the politicians. On
   September 8th Beppe Grillo, a comedian, set out to gather signatures
   for a petition calling for changes to the electoral and parliamentary
   rules. He hoped for 50,000 signatures, but got six times as many.
   Umberto Bossi, leader of the Northern League, recently proposed a tax
   strike. He has since back-tracked to propose a boycott of state-run
   lotteries, but not before winning the support of a respected
   employers' representative for his more radical idea.

   That was a sign of exasperation in business, notably in the north. The
   employers' leader, Luca Cordero di Montezemolo, has called the high
   level of corporate tax an "emergency" and urged the government to trim
   it. Yet the left-wing parties in Romano Prodi's coalition want any
   extra revenues used to mitigate social inequality.

   Caught between these demands, Mr Padoa-Schioppa feels anything but
   fortunate. His reaction is to remind people that Italy has vast debt;
   that the interest soaks up cash that could be spent on infrastructure
   and welfare; and that the tax bonanza has done little more than smooth
   progress towards the aim of cutting debt to below 100% of GDP by 2010.
   This point is the more pertinent since there are signs that the
   economy is losing puff. It grew by only 0.1% in the second quarter.

   Mr Padoa-Schioppa has so far resisted calls for tax cuts and argued
   that, far from raising spending, the government should cut it. He has
   circulated a "green book" to ministers with tips on how to curb their
   departments' spending. So far, he has been backed by Mr Prodi. But,
   with many on the right of the coalition calling for tax cuts, and the
   government appearing to be more unpopular than ever in the polls, the
   pressure to give way is growing.

