
   Poland leaks spooky secrets but fails to prove a conspiracy


   PUBLISHING the names of serving spies is a huge taboo in the
   intelligence world. It endangers not only them, but anyone they have
   met. You might do it to your enemies on occasion, but never to your
   own side.

   Yet Poland's official report on the recently disbanded WSI (military
   intelligence service), has named dozens of current and former agents
   including some in highly sensitive places such as Afghanistan. That
   has provoked derision and alarm in equal measure, for at first sight
   the gains seem elusive and the costs high. Serving diplomats, their
   cover blown, have hurried home. They include the ambassadors to
   Austria, China, Kuwait and Turkey. At least ten of the names,
   including the military attaché in Moscow, are fiercely contested.

   The aim was to highlight the WSI's role in the cosy business and
   political arrangements that took root in Poland following the collapse
   of communism. The report does raise disturbing questions about both
   Russian penetration of the WSI, and its involvement--perhaps with
   Kremlin help--in the energy industry among others. It strongly
   suggests a past failure of political oversight. But the seemingly
   muddled and inconclusive material published so far falls far short of
   the "atom bomb", proving conspiracy and subversion, promised by its
   author, Antoni Macierewicz. It is puzzling too that some scandals of
   past years are treated so sketchily.

   Mr Macierewicz is undaunted, as are his sponsors, Lech and Jaroslaw
   Kaczynski, the twins who are respectively Poland's president and prime
   minister. "This was one of our most important goals and it was worth
   it," said the prime minister. Government defenders say the criticism
   comes from those with a vested interest in maintaining the old order.
   No real secrets have been leaked, as the Russians already knew the WSI
   inside out.

   Mr Macierewicz, who--remarkably for a political appointee--runs the
   new military counter-intelligence service, insists the best is yet to
   come. Many leads remain to be chased; missing and destroyed documents
   have slowed things down. Maybe so--though it is hard to argue that
   Polish political life will benefit from yet more months of leaks,
   innuendo and suspicion.

