
   Ukraine's president dissolves parliament. Maybe


   SIT-INS, blockades and fisticuffs are routine distractions in the
   Rada, Ukraine's parliament. But this week's chaos was unusual even by
   Ukrainian standards. After a big demonstration last weekend urged him
   on, President Viktor Yushchenko signed a decree on April 2nd to
   dissolve parliament and call a fresh election for May 27th. In the
   Rada, the ruling coalition promptly denounced the president and
   refused to budge. Each side now accuses the other of usurping power.

   Mr Yushchenko's immediate worry was a run of defections from his
   party, Our Ukraine, and the one led by Yulia Tymoshenko, his ally
   during the "orange revolution" of 2004. Ms Tymoshenko later became his
   prime minister, until her alliance with the president drowned in a
   mire of corruption allegations in 2005. The government is now led by
   Viktor Yanukovich, whom Mr Yushchenko defeated in the presidential
   race that sparked the revolution, but who became prime minister
   (again) last August. The methods used to swell the ranks of his
   parliamentary coalition are widely rumoured to include bribery and
   blackmail.

   The dodgy recruitment drive is the latest phase of a campaign to
   emasculate Mr Yushchenko, which began at the start of the unlikely
   cohabitation of the two Viktors. A constitutional reform agreed on
   during the orange revolution transferred some of the president's
   functions to parliament. Another law passed in January, with the help
   of the opportunistic Ms Tymoshenko, weakened Mr Yushchenko further.
   His efforts to nominate a foreign minister were repeatedly frustrated,
   as was his foreign policy itself.

   The coalition's leaders are now openly bent on amassing a majority big
   enough to override the presidential veto and strip Mr Yushchenko of
   his residual powers. It sounds like the sort of constitutional
   fine-tuning to be expected in a young democracy. In Ukraine, alas,
   disputes that may seem like issues of principle are often disguised
   struggles for wealth. Politicians' attitudes to any given office
   depend on their prospects of occupying it. Beyond the Rada, the
   country is worryingly divided between Yanukovich supporters in the
   east and south, and those mostly in Kiev and the west who want a more
   enlightened government.

   Many in this second camp, who have despaired of Mr Yushchenko's
   indecisiveness, were gleeful over the dissolution. But there are two
   reasons for caution. One is that, if the election goes ahead, it may
   produce a parliament that is just as fractious and corrupt as the
   existing one, which took almost six months after the previous election
   just to produce a government. Mr Yanukovich's Party of the Regions
   could even emerge stronger. The country may thus be fated to endure
   yet more political horsetrading and backstabbing--unless and until the
   entire ruling group of venal politicians is replaced.

   The other trouble is that there may not be an election at all. The
   legal basis for the president's dissolution is questionable, and Mr
   Yanukovich's lot have referred it to the constitutional court--though
   the chances of a timely ruling that is not tainted by threats and
   bribery are remote. Some in Moscow note the similarities to the
   Russian stand-off of 1993, which ended with Boris Yeltsin's tanks
   shelling Russia's parliament. Ukraine's defence minister says the army
   is loyal to the president; the police answer to the government.

   Meanwhile, anti-dissolution tent camps have sprung up in Kiev. For
   outside observers, the tents that housed the orange revolutionaries
   became symbols of peaceful democratic protest. For Ukraine's
   politicians, they have become just another way of getting what you
   want.

