
                                                                      EPA

                                    EPA

   Mikheil Saakashvili is duly re-elected as Georgia's president, but he
   is a somewhat chastened man


   ON THE night of January 5th, as Georgians voted in a presidential
   election, men in uniform were throwing snowballs. A Christmas fair
   cheered up Rustaveli Avenue, Tbilisi's main street. Anything that
   could be illuminated was. All normal in some places--but a novelty in
   Georgia.

   Four years ago, when Mikheil Saakashvili and his supporters, armed
   with roses, stormed parliament and seized power, Georgia was in
   freefall and Rustaveli Avenue was barely lit. It had been the scene of
   violence by Soviet troops, and then of civil war. Since Mr Saakashvili
   came to office, Tbilisi has been transformed. The economy is booming
   and foreigners are flocking to invest. This is more impressive since
   Georgia has almost no mineral resources and is under Russian embargo.

   Merab Kuchukhidze, selling toys at the Christmas fair, voted for Mr
   Saakashvili because "I want this to continue." That is why Mr
   Saakashvili got 52% of the vote in a country he has subjected to
   radical reform. But still last November 50,000 Georgians came out on
   the streets to protest against poverty, rising prices and injustice.
   The protest ended in violence and a state of emergency. Even when
   Georgia seems normal, a crisis is not far off.

   In November Mr Saakashvili, the darling of the West, sent riot police
   with truncheons, water cannons and tear-gas to disperse the crowds.
   Special forces shut down and vandalised the Imedi television station,
   the main news outlet for the opposition. The disproportionate use of
   force shocked Mr Saakashvili's Western friends and repulsed most
   Georgians.

   Yet Mr Saakashvili is unrepentant. He says the use of force was
   justified by the threat of a coup. Opposition leaders, he claims, were
   planning to storm parliament and overthrow the government. Imedi,
   owned by a tycoon, Badri Patarkatsishvili, was spreading provocative
   disinformation. (A few weeks later Georgia's security services taped
   Mr Patarkatsishvili in London offering $100m to a state official to
   precipitate a coup. This information was embarrassing enough for Imedi
   journalists to stage a strike against their owner.)

   At the time Mr Saakashvili implied that Russia, Georgia's main
   adversary, was behind the instability. "Stop blaming Russia for your
   domestic problems," the opposition said. They had a point. The crisis,
   unnoticed by the West, had been building for some time and was largely
   brought on by the president himself. His reforms have cut deep into
   Georgia's way of life. To fight corruption, he fired 30,000 policemen
   and slashed the bureaucracy. He liberalised the economy more than most
   European countries: anything that could be privatised was. Unlike his
   predecessor, Mr Saakashvili showed no reverence for the old
   intelligentsia and little respect for seniority. He brought in a new
   Western-educated elite that was aloof and efficient. If you are over
   40 and don't speak English, you are a nobody, some Georgians complain.

   A backlash was inevitable. "If, after all this, we got 80% of the
   votes, it would have meant we had done something wrong," Mr
   Saakashvili says in an interview. But it was his style that infuriated
   even some supporters. He spared no time burnishing his credentials
   abroad, but did not explain his policies to the voters. He bragged
   about his reforms but showed little compassion for those they left
   behind. He admits he was insensitive and that some of his liberal
   policies were inflexible and too harsh. His election message, devised
   by American advisers, was: "I listened, I heard, I understand."
   Billboards showing Mr Saakashvili looking after the old and frail
   advertised "Georgia without poverty".

   The opposition says this was cynical. "As if he did not know about the
   social problems in the country," says Salome Zourabichvili, a former
   foreign minister who is now in opposition. Besides, she adds, the
   demonstrations were about the principles of democracy and justice. She
   accuses Mr Saakashvili of usurping power and undermining the legal
   system and property rights. For David Usupashvili, the most moderate
   of the opposition leaders, the question is "whether we have a
   government working within a rule of law or do we have a team of `good
   guys' who cut corners in the name of reform."

   The protesters first demanded that Mr Saakashvili hold a parliamentary
   election next spring. But its call for Mr Saakashvili to resign
   backfired when he called an early presidential election for which the
   opposition was unprepared. Levan Gachechiladze, the candidate it put
   up against him, was no match for Mr Saakashvili's political experience
   or charisma. Being nondescript was not enough. "He talks little and
   does not promise anything," one of his own supporters said
   approvingly.

   Yet the protest vote against Mr Saakashvili, particularly in Tbilisi,
   was big enough to give Mr Gachechiladze 26% of the vote. The election
   itself was imperfect. Mr Saakashvili exploited his presidential
   position during the campaign, and the media were biased. There were
   incidents of intimidation and pressure. But international observers
   said it had passed the test of a democratic election. It was certainly
   the most competitive one in Georgia's history. Until now, says Ghia
   Nodia, a political analyst, "power in Georgia had always been
   contested on the streets, while elections were simply a way of
   endorsing it."

   Contesting political power in an election still seems unorthodox to
   many Georgians. Georgi Khaindrava, a former minister, predicted
   fatalistically that if Mr Saakashvili won more than 50% of votes, it
   would mean the election had been rigged. When the election commission
   said Mr Saakashvili had scored enough votes to avoid a second round,
   the opposition cried foul, staged a protest and later burst into its
   offices. Tolerance is a rare commodity in Georgian politics on either
   side. "If you compare Mr Saakashvili with the opposition, he is still
   more democratic," says Mr Nodia.

   However imperfect, the election has delivered some good results.
   First, it has left Mr Saakashvili in power. Georgia's problem was not
   lack of pluralism but a malfunctioning state, which Mr Saakashvili is
   still the best man to fix. Second, the election gave him only a thin
   majority, which has had a sobering effect on him. "I am used to
   winning elections with percentages in the high 70s," he says. Many
   Georgians want him to stay but with reduced support; they may vote
   against his party in the parliamentary election.

   Mr Saakashvili appears to have learnt his lesson. "It is much better
   to have a mainstream opposition in parliament, than a marginalised
   opposition on the streets," he concedes. He has promised to offer the
   opposition jobs in the government, and called for a truce with Russia.
   Mr Saakashvili has also revealed that Georgian officials have recently
   had informal discussions with Russian officials, who have hinted that
   Russia may soon lift its embargo.

   The election also taught a lesson to Georgia's Western friends: that
   unqualified support for one man may not always be in Georgia's best
   interest. Like many modernisers (his role-model is Ataturk), Mr
   Saakashvili has autocratic instincts. The problem is that when
   democratic institutions are weak, a benevolent autocrat can turn into
   a malign one. So the best thing the West can do is to provide some
   checks and balances. A chastened President Saakashvili may just be a
   better leader for Georgia.

