
   Ukraine is in political crisis again. Is there a way out?


   THE tents and flags are back in Independence Square; shots of the
   crowd again beam from giant screens to make them feel strong. The
   tactics are borrowed from the orange revolution of 2004; but the heart
   is missing. Speakers strive in vain to rouse the masses--some drunk,
   many seemingly paid to attend. At a protest encampment near the Rada,
   Ukraine's parliament, the carnival atmosphere of 2004 has been
   replaced by one of surliness.

   This shabby parody was provoked by the decision last week of Viktor
   Yushchenko, whom the revolution swept to Ukraine's presidency, to
   dissolve the Rada and call an early parliamentary election for May
   27th. The Rada's majority and the government say the president's
   decree is unconstitutional. Both are headed by Viktor Yanukovich, who
   was beaten in 2004 but became prime minister again last year.

   Mr Yushchenko's team says, as his adviser Oleg Rybachuk puts it, that
   Mr Yanukovich has himself "ignored all the constitutional blah blah
   blah" since he returned to office, constantly encroaching on Mr
   Yushchenko's authority, and using blackmail and bribery to amass a
   majority big enough to emasculate the president altogether. (Mr
   Yanukovich's people retort that the members they have turned are too
   rich to need bribing.) The government is refusing to organise the
   vote. Mr Yanukovich's Party of the Regions (PRU), and its Communist
   and Socialist allies, are refusing to participate in it, until
   Ukraine's constitutional court rules on the legality of the
   president's dissolution decree.

   Some of the court's judges this week complained of threats and
   pressure, delaying the hearing. Mr Yanukovich deployed a mix of menace
   (threats of impeachment, thousands bused into Kiev for his rallies)
   and compromise to persuade Mr Yushchenko to back down. But the
   president is not inclined to. Attending an Orthodox Easter service, he
   said he was determined to "cleanse the temple of the Pharisees and
   money-changers". Mr Rybachuk says Mr Yanukovich's lot are gangsters
   who respond only to force.

   On April 11th a way out of the impasse involving an election, but not
   as soon as May, suddenly looked likely. Prolonged instability would
   not suit the business tycoons who stand behind Mr Yanukovich. But less
   comfortable outcomes are still possible, such as a court ruling after
   the election that retroactively invalidates it. A more immediate
   danger is violence. This week riot police were positioned between
   Independence Square and a rival, pro-president rally staged (with
   better music) nearby. Mr Yushchenko's strong support in the capital,
   crucial in 2004, and his control of most of the security services,
   might prove decisive if the crisis deepens.

   Optimists see this latest Ukrainian stand-off as a product of the
   youth and fragility of its democratic institutions, and especially of
   a fudged constitutional reform agreed in 2004. They hope that a fresh
   election, plus some constitutional tinkering, will produce cleaner and
   more stable politics--even if, as Yuri Yakimenko, a Kiev pollster,
   says is likely, the new Rada ends up looking much like the present
   one. The only change might be that the Socialists, who betrayed their
   supporters by joining Mr Yanukovich, fail to get in. There will
   doubtless also be much talk of reviving the old orange alliance
   between Mr Yushchenko's party and Yulia Tymoshenko, his revolutionary
   ally and one-time prime minister, for whom every crisis brings fresh
   opportunity.

   The trouble is that, whatever its constitutional arrangements, Ukraine
   will for the foreseeable future be governed by corrupt, discredited
   politicians. Mr Yanukovich and his gang seem to treat
   everything--judges, parliamentary seats, protesters--as commodities
   for sale. To them the orange revolution was a paid-for confidence
   trick. But the revolutionaries themselves emerged from the same
   post-Soviet regime. Many were motivated by greed as much as principle,
   and afterwards felt entitled to political and financial rewards.

   Worse, beneath the struggle for power and assets lies a deeper schism,
   which Mr Yushchenko has failed to bridge. Although he roused only
   half-hearted cheers at his Kiev rally, Mr Yanukovich unquestionably
   commands wide support in south and east Ukraine. Old geopolitical
   loyalties are part of the explanation. "Yushchenko is Bush's puppet,"
   said one of the livelier protesters in the square, wearing a Red Army
   cap and carrying a placard showing George Bush as a Nazi. The
   Americans, she added, need Ukraine for their war with Russia.

   But there are other differences between Mr Yanukovich's backers and
   the western and central Ukrainians who mostly support his opponents.
   The east suffered in the Stalinist famine of the 1930s and inherited a
   political culture that combines narrow paternalistic expectations with
   profound cynicism. Easterners despised Mr Yushchenko in 2004 because,
   to them, his promises of a new sort of government were so much cant.

   That cynicism has not been wholly vindicated. Ukraine now has freer
   media and more assertive citizens. Even today's rancour can be seen as
   evidence of political pluralism, at least when compared with the
   situation in neighbouring Russia. But, thanks to the orange leaders'
   shortcomings and squabbles, neither have the cynics turned out to be
   completely wrong.

