
   The UN's troubling departure from Ingushetia

   EVEN by the standards of the Caucasus, the two little-noticed
   rocket-propelled grenade attacks in March on the United Nations'
   office compound in Nazran, the main city of the republic of
   Ingushetia, were worrying. One of Russia's poorest provinces, it hosts
   thousands of refugees, and is supposedly a safe base for international
   agencies working in neighbouring Chechnya. The bombardment gave the
   lie to Kremlin claims that life in the region is "normal". But the
   real story of the decision by the World Health Organisation, the World
   Food Programme, UNICEF and others to pull their expat staff out to
   Vladikavkaz has a still more alarming aspect.

   The Economist understands that the attacks followed a dispute about
   money between the UN's security department and the bit of the Ingush
   interior ministry responsible for guarding their compound. The UN
   apparently resisted a demand by the guards that it pay for all their
   other work at the compound (which is used by other outfits too).

   Officially, all sides deny any disagreement. A UN official in the
   region pooh-poohs a link with the grenade attacks as "half-arsed". Yet
   some UN-niks have been heard to say that their supposed protectors
   have been harassing them. Curiously, one of the two grenades narrowly
   missed the building used by the UN security team. The other one hit
   it.

   The unlikely good cop in this sorry tale seems to be Russia's infamous
   Federal Security Service. It warned the UN about further violence, and
   of a serious threat of kidnapping. Foreign UN staff now avoid even
   travelling through Ingushetia, for example en route to Chechnya. The
   Ingush government has reportedly offered sympathy but little else. No
   wonder: bombings, killings and kidnappings are commonplace there,
   driven by a dizzying mix of politics, religion and revenge. Two
   members of the Ingush president's family have been snatched. The
   security services are both victims and perpetrators of the chaos.

   For all its oil-fuelled bravado, the Kremlin all too often fails to
   meet its people's basic needs, relying instead on outside agencies and
   charities (it routinely accuses the latter of espionage). It seems
   that Russia--a permanent member of the UN Security Council--may be
   unable to protect that organisation's staff from its own state
   servants. Unable, or unwilling: it can be hard to tell if corruption
   happens against the Kremlin's wishes, or with its blessing.

