
   The biggest fault in Italian education is that there are too many old
   teachers

   THE Bar Cristal, beneath an elevated section of Rome's inner ringway,
   caters mostly to travellers from the nearby bus and rail stations. But
   by 7.30am most days, it is packed with teachers, many of whom have
   come from as far away as Naples. They are part of Italy's army of
   150,000 casual teachers, waiting for a call to teach in a
   short-staffed school. Darting between classrooms, they tack together
   take-home pay of EUR1,100 ($1,500) a month.

   Earlier this month Romano Prodi's centre-left government enacted a law
   to give full-time jobs to a third of these freelance educators. The
   plan is to absorb all of them by 2009. This reflects a wish to improve
   the consistency and standard of teaching. But it also responds to
   recent incidents suggesting Italy's teachers have lost control.

   Scenes videoed on mobile phones and posted on the internet have shown
   a 12-year-old girl performing oral sex in class, a teacher with a gun
   at his head and a handicapped pupil being roughed up by his
   classmates. In another case, a 16-year-old boy threw himself to his
   death, apparently because of taunting over his alleged homosexuality.
   Teachers argue that such incidents are untypical. But few deny that
   the education system has big problems--and that its shortcomings are
   one cause of Italy's struggling economy.

   Since 2000 successive reports from the OECD's Programme for
   International Student Assessment have shattered the belief that
   Italian schools are among Europe's best. The most recent put them near
   the bottom of the heap. In maths Italy's 15-year-olds were
   outperformed by their peers in all but three OECD countries. Almost a
   third were "unable to display the minimum level of mathematics
   proficiency needed to succeed in their professional and private life".
   The share of young adults with essential qualifications was far below
   the OECD average.

   No similarly exhaustive comparison has been done for tertiary
   education. But that so many young Italians study abroad, and so few
   young foreigners (2% of all foreign students) do in Italy, points to
   equally low standards at university level.

   The teachers' unions like to stress Italy's relatively low public
   spending on education as a share of GDP. Scant investment may hold
   back the universities: spending on core tertiary education is 30%
   below the OECD average. But it is rising per student, as a low birth
   rate reduces the number of matriculations. As for schools, spending
   per primary- and secondary-school pupil is actually above the OECD
   average. The OECD suggests that its allocation is faulty, with too
   much cash going to a "large number of comparatively poorly paid
   teachers", who work long hours in schools with low teacher-student
   ratios.

   But there is another explanation. As in much of Italy, a logjam blocks
   young entrants. This explains the morning crowd at the Bar Cristal. It
   may lie behind the breakdown of discipline in classrooms. In 2001 90%
   of upper secondary teachers were over 40, compared with an OECD
   average of two-thirds. A mere 0.1% were under 30 (against 11% in all
   rich countries).

   The incorporation of tens of thousands of youthful casual teachers
   will be a step in the right direction. But matters are worse in
   universities, where patronage, cronyism and secure tenure are the
   rule. A study by Corriere della Sera in January showed that a full 30%
   of top academics and 10% of lecturers were over 65. Only nine of the
   country's 18,651 senior academics are under 35, compared with 7% in
   America and fully 16% in Britain. In education, as in far too many
   walks of Italian life, it is grey power that rules.

