


   What Europeans make of Iowa and New Hampshire

   VOTERS of America, well done: you are less racist (or sexist) than
   Europeans had feared. Remember, though, that you are rather naive:
   please try to pick a competent president this time. This dismissive
   summary, combining condescension with distrust, captures all too many
   European reactions to the duel between Barack Obama and Hillary
   Clinton for the Democratic nomination in this year's presidential
   election (and, given the gulf between most Europeans and the
   Republicans, this is the contest to be Europe's preferred candidate as
   well--although a few Europeans retain a soft spot for John McCain).

   A French newspaper, Libération, said that the arrival in the White
   House of "a black man, married to a black woman, [with] a black
   family" would be an act of "atonement" that would restore the image of
   an America "shunned in every corner of the planet". A German tabloid,
   Bild, offered praise for Mr Obama's "sexy" charms, under the headline:
   "This Black American Will Become the New Kennedy!" In Spain El País
   trumped all others, telling readers: "The question is whether the
   United States is ready for a president who is black, a woman, an
   evangelical minister, a Mormon or a Catholic."

   You might expect even cynical Europeans to be impressed by the sight
   of ordinary Americans tramping through the snow in Iowa and New
   Hampshire to hear politicians speak. Not the writers at a German
   newspaper, Süddeutsche Zeitung. The duel in New Hampshire, it
   grumbled, had degenerated into an apolitical beauty contest. Mr
   Obama's appeal to voters was based on sentiment without substance: if
   only Americans would heed the lessons of the Bush years and choose the
   experienced Mrs Clinton. A Belgian newspaper, Le Soir, struck a kinder
   note. Writing after Mr Obama's win in Iowa, it argued that the signs
   were that "this time, Americans will not be duped" by calculating
   politicians, but were seeking leaders with convictions. Their optimism
   is not without naivety, Le Soir cautioned, "but who is going to
   complain after the dark years of Bush junior?"

   In a random sampling in the streets of Nuremberg, in Bavaria, ordinary
   Germans seemed impressed by the two things they knew about Mr Obama:
   he is not George Bush, and he is the son of an African. Dirk Hellwig,
   a graphic designer, said he would feel more "positive" about America
   if Mr Obama won the presidency. "I don't know what he wants to do," Mr
   Hellwig admitted. "But I think Germans will think Obama is a sign that
   something is changing." A win by Mrs Clinton would also send a signal
   of American change, Mr Hellwig said. "But the signal would be bigger
   from Obama, because he is black."

   It is striking that many Europeans skate over the political views of
   Mrs Clinton and Mr Obama and instead treat their fight as a simple
   Rorschach test of the health of the American dream. In fact, both
   Democratic frontrunners' policy platforms answer (at least
   superficially) some of the biggest European gripes about Mr Bush over
   the past eight years. Mr Obama, unlike Mrs Clinton, consistently
   opposed the Iraq war--although changes of government in France and
   Germany have largely healed transatlantic wounds over Iraq. Both
   candidates take positions on climate change that are far closer to
   Europe than anything Mr Bush has offered. Both have called for the
   closure of the Guantánamo detention camp. Both have echoed the outrage
   of many Europeans at the feeble federal response to Hurricane Katrina.

   In the first Democratic debate in April, Mr Obama even hailed the
   European Union as among America's most important allies. Recently he
   refuted charges that he had never actually been to Europe. Telling an
   Iowan reporter he had been to Europe "multiple times", Mr Obama
   recalled meeting Britain's then prime minister, Tony Blair, in Downing
   Street, during a stopover in London. He has also spoken proudly of a
   2006 meeting in Washington with Nicolas Sarkozy, now the French
   president.

   Allies or rivals?

   This may turn out to be the high point of European infatuation with
   the leading Democratic candidates, at least if previous campaigns are
   any guide. Presidential candidates routinely pledge to reach out to
   allies and to improve America's image abroad. Before the 2000 election
   a French newspaper, Le Figaro, was impressed by the foreign-policy
   experts recruited by one George Bush. (A Bush presidency offers
   America's allies the promise of "partnership with an administration
   skilled in foreign affairs," cooed Le Figaro.)

   A former Irish prime minister, John Bruton, who now heads the European
   Commission's delegation in America, warns Europeans against imagining
   that any president will bow to calls to surrender American
   sovereignty, or make concessions on trade, in the global interest.
   "It's clear that any US president will pursue the interests of the
   electorate that has elected him or her," he says. It is also worth
   noting, he adds, that Mr Bush's second term has seen smoother
   relations with the EU, amid "a general willingness to approach things
   multilaterally".

   Alas, Mr Bush's first term left many Europeans past caring. His
   re-election in 2004 was a shock that in part explains the snippiness
   of much European coverage now. To some Europeans, Mr Bush's election
   in 2000 seemed no more than an unhappy accident: in their telling, he
   ran (falsely) as a centrist and compassionate conservative and then
   stole the presidency in Florida. But his re-election could not be
   explained away so easily. Ultimately, it reflected the choice of
   American voters, which some Europeans still cannot forgive.

   Nor is European enthusiasm for either candidate likely to survive the
   election of Mrs Clinton, Mr Obama, or whoever else becomes president.
   The person who gets voters' nod will rule as an American, promoting
   American interests around the world--and no doubt disappointing many
   watchers from abroad. For Europeans to imagine anything else would be
   naive indeed.

