
   Money brings organised crime to Basilicata

   THE landscape is the same: arid grey hills dropping steeply to a plain
   through which the River Agri flows. Even Aliano, a cluster of houses
   poised above ravines, appears much as it did when Mussolini banished
   Carlo Levi there in 1935. Of course, a lot has changed since Levi
   wrote "Christ Stopped at Eboli", about the people and poverty he
   found. Aliano today has water, electricity, roads and schools. Public
   money and private remittances have brought consumer goods. Malaria was
   beaten 50 years ago. Locals' lives have improved far beyond what Levi
   could ever have imagined.

   But all around are regions racked with organised crime. Puglia has the
   Sacra Corona Unita, Campania the Camorra and Calabria the worst of the
   lot, the 'Ndrangheta (this week a feud within the 'Ndrangheta reached
   as far as Germany, when six Italians were shot dead near Duisburg
   railway station). Now even Basilicata, with a population of only
   600,000, has criminals of its own.

   Flourishing fruit farms and a tourist boom along the Ionian coast have
   been the main lure. "Nobody was aware of what was happening until
   bombs began exploding. And then there were murders," laments Filippo
   Mele, a former mayor of Scanzano Jonico. Police operations have put
   dozens in jail, but any vacuum is soon filled.

   About 100km (60 miles) from Scanzano Jonico, the villages of the upper
   Agri sit near a big oilfield. Special measures were tried to stop
   organised crime muscling in when oil production began a decade ago,
   but the bonanza has brought an inflow of public money. The region and
   local villages share royalties expected to be worth EUR750m ($1
   billion) over the next 15 years. Oil and coastal rackets are not the
   only objects of the criminals' interest. Public funds poured in after
   an earthquake in 1980; EU farm subsidies are another tempting target.

   A fog of suspicion also clouds local institutions. On August 6th a
   judge in Potenza, the regional capital, ordered the suspension of
   eight officials who had vetted projects for EU subsidies. Even the law
   is suspect. Last spring the chief prosecutor in Potenza retired early.
   "Incompatibility with local surroundings" has led to transfers for a
   prosecutor and the court's president in Matera, Basilicata's second
   city.

   Luigi de Magistris, a magistrate from Calabria whose investigations
   have shaken Basilicata's magistracy, worries about what is happening.
   "There is a virus, but no anti-virus. There is collusion between
   businessmen and politicians of left, right and centre, and within the
   state there are those who are anti-state," he says. Alas, where public
   institutions are absent, weak or worse, it tends to be the organised
   criminals who step in to make the law.

