
                                                                  Reuters

                                  Reuters

   To judge from its state election campaigns, Germany's governing
   parties are flirting with recklessness

   THE blows were struck in Bavaria but the impact was felt as far away
   as Hesse. On December 20th a young Greek and his Turkish companion
   answered a pensioner who told them to stop smoking on the Munich
   underground by beating him up. "We have too many young foreign
   criminals," responded Roland Koch (above, with Angela Merkel). Mr Koch
   is fighting to be re-elected for a third term as Hesse's premier.
   Foreign miscreants, he declared, should be deported; young ones should
   be taught a lesson with "warning-shot arrests", "education camps" and
   stiffer sentences.

   Mr Koch pronounced himself "the acknowledged voice of a silent
   majority of Germans". The row over that claim has swamped local issues
   in the election and poisoned already tense relations between the two
   parties in Germany's "grand coalition" government.

   State elections often test the popularity both of German governments
   and of the themes deployed later in national contests. The previous
   chancellor, Gerhard Schröder, called an early federal election after
   his Social Democratic Party (SPD) lost power in North-Rhine Westphalia
   in May 2005. This time, three forthcoming state elections--in Hesse
   and Lower Saxony on January 27th and in Hamburg on February 24th--are
   trials not so much of the ruling grand coalition as of the reluctant
   partners that constitute it, the SPD and the Christian Democratic
   Union (CDU).

   Lower Saxony's premier, Christian Wulff of the CDU, should easily
   defeat his SPD rival. Hamburg, a city-state, matters little, though it
   could produce Germany's first state-level coalition between the CDU
   and the Greens. But in Hesse, a medium-sized state that thrives as a
   hub of transport and finance, the race is close and the stakes high.
   The SPD hopes to pull out of its political tailspin, the CDU to
   confirm its position as front-runner in the federal election, due by
   September 2009.

   Mr Koch's scalding of foreign hooligans brought the talk to
   boiling-point. It is "an insult to every corner of Germany", thundered
   the SPD's Frank-Walter Steinmeier, who is both vice-chancellor and
   foreign minister. Joschka Fischer, a former Green leader and foreign
   minister, plans to break his vow of political silence to boost his
   party and slam Mr Koch's.

   To Mr Koch's surprise, the SPD has been making some headway. His
   challenger, Andrea Ypsilanti, has been championing the party's demand
   for minimum wages in selected low-paid industries and, eventually,
   throughout the economy. The party hopes to distance itself from the
   reforms enacted by Mr Schröder, which alienated supporters and helped
   fuel the rise of the Left Party, heir to East Germany's communists.
   For the first time in two years, says Klaus-Peter Schöppner, a
   pollster, the SPD is setting the political agenda.

   The CDU dares not resist too stoutly. Although state governments have
   little say in wage policy, the gap in Hesse between the SPD and the
   CDU has narrowed to four percentage points, from nearly 20 when Mr
   Koch won an absolute majority in 2003. Ms Ypsilanti, a former
   stewardess from a working-class family, has pulled almost even with Mr
   Koch as voters' first choice for the state's top job.

   So he has changed the subject to teenage thuggery, a theme taken up by
   the CDU's national leaders. "There can be no taboo issues in election
   campaigns," says the chancellor, Angela Merkel. Whether this tack will
   pay off is unclear. More than 60% of Hesse's voters back tougher
   treatment of young criminals, but 56% want minimum wages, according to
   Forschungsgruppe Wahlen, a pollster.

   But Mr Koch is still fighting charges that he has cut the number of
   police and is embarrassed by new figures showing that assaults by
   teenagers have jumped by 66% since 1999, more than almost anywhere
   else in Germany. He may have gone too far when he suggested parts of
   the penal code for youth could be applied to children under 14, which
   was widely read as an argument for throwing them in jail.

   Both parties' vote-grubbing initiatives seem more populist than
   sensible. Nearly 1,000 experts have signed a statement declaring that
   the "penal law cannot be a substitute for helping children and
   teenagers or for policies that promote integration" of minorities.
   Opinion on minimum wages is more divided, but most economists think
   they are an inefficient way to fight poverty and that, set too high,
   they will destroy jobs.

   Mr Koch has dabbled in divisive politics before (a campaign against
   dual citizenship helped him to win office the first time), but he has
   governed as a technocrat, not an ideologue. Crime has fallen, thanks
   partly to his enthusiasm for video surveillance of public places; he
   has repaired the school system. He recently won planning approval for
   a fourth runway for Frankfurt's airport, Europe's third-busiest, which
   may help prolong the state's economic upswing. On knotty tax issues,
   the CDU has often turned to him to strike compromises with the SPD
   finance minister, Peer Steinbrück. Mr Koch may still hope one day to
   replace Ms Merkel as chancellor and CDU leader.

   But his lustre has dimmed. Hesse was slow to cut back study in
   Gymnasiums, schools that prepare students for university, from nine
   years to eight. When it acted, it was clumsy, angering the majority of
   voters who say education is their top concern. Mr Koch excels as an
   orator but flops on television. The amiable Ms Ypsilanti, meanwhile,
   has begun to master policy and smarten up her speeches.

   Likely to lose his absolute majority, Mr Koch hopes to govern with
   Germany's liberals, the Free Democrats. But the election could produce
   more awkward results. If the Left Party crosses the 5% threshold for
   entering the state assembly, that could produce a left-wing majority
   with the SPD and the Greens. But the SPD says it will not depend on
   the Left either in coalition or even just for support. That could lead
   either to a three-party combination (the Greens and Free Democrats
   plus one of the big parties) or, more likely, to yet another unloved
   grand coalition. Even if the CDU were to lead it, Mr Koch might give
   up.

   Germany's leaders say they are eager to put the ugliness of the
   elections behind them: 2008 is the coalition's "key year", says Ms
   Merkel. But the row over punishment and pay is ominous. The two big
   parties have come to resemble each other. To persuade voters there is
   a difference, both have shown, in state elections, that they are
   prepared to flirt with reckless ideas.

