
   Sweden's growing worries about Russia fuel a love-in with Norway

   WHEN the cold war ended, Sweden felt able to turn a furtive friendship
   with its fellow neutral Finland into a close economic, political and
   security one. Now it wants also to cosy up to its western neighbour
   and NATO member, Norway. Again, the motivation is Russia--but fear,
   not rapprochement, is the spur.

   The Swedes' immediate worry is a planned Russian-German gas pipeline
   on the Baltic seabed. That is littered with dumped chemical weapons
   and other munitions dating from the second world war, and home to
   sensitive submarine defences built during the cold war. A planned
   pumping station (see map) close to the Swedish shore has infuriated
   the country's defence establishment, which fears it will be used for
   Russian electronic espionage or other mischief-making. Such concerns
   give Sweden no legal basis for blocking the pipeline, but it is trying
   to delay it on environmental grounds.

   A combative radio interview by the Russian ambassador to Sweden,
   Alexander Kadakin, has failed to allay fears. He repeatedly described
   critics of the pipeline as "idiots", arguing: "why should we need
   [another] spy station when we already have the real-time capability to
   read the number plates of every car in Stockholm?"

   Last week Mats Engman, head of Sweden's influential MUST military
   intelligence and security service, publicly gave warning of the
   "Russian bear's...greater self-confidence and increased freedom of
   action." In the same week another top military thinker, Stefan
   Gustafsson, said: "the strategic map has changed. We must now analyse
   what resources are required at home if tension in the north were to
   grow." He noted that Russia's economic prosperity was financing a
   sharp rise in defence spending.

   Sweden and Norway are the military heavyweights of Scandinavia
   (Finland maintains a well-trained army with a stellar record, but has
   only a vestigial navy and air force). General Håken Syrén, commander
   of the Swedish armed forces, said recently that "Swedish and Norwegian
   security and defence interests are running closer than ever...and
   often shared." Sweden already shares its radar surveillance data
   closely with Finland and is discussing other military monitoring
   projects. It now hopes to match these by similar co-operation with
   Norway.

   However much diplomats may wince, there is no disguising that all this
   aimed at only one country: Russia. The hottest issue is energy. Norway
   hopes that a newly hawkish Sweden will be supportive in its
   long-running dispute with Russia over the two countries' northern sea
   border (see map). At stake are the "High North's" lucrative, and still
   largely unexploited, oil and gas reserves.

   A big sign of intensified co-operation would be if Norway chose to
   upgrade its air force with the Gripen JAS-39 fighter, made by Sweden's
   Saab. A Swedish television investigation this week claimed to have
   unearthed evidence of bribes of 1 billion kronor ($142m) paid to
   support the sale of 24 Gripen jets to the Czech Republic. A second
   programme next week will make similar allegations about sales in
   Norway. That may hold things up a bit.

   Unlearning the trusting habits of the past decade will be hard:
   Sweden's security establishment was run down in years when trade
   promotion and haggling in Brussels outweighed Russia-watching. Hawks
   are cheered by the foreign minister, Carl Bildt, a tough-minded and
   eloquent figure who as prime minister from 1991 to 1994 threw Sweden's
   weight behind the freedom of the Baltic states.

   All this is uncomfortable for Finland, forced by geography into a more
   cautious stance towards Russia. Finns have never forgotten that they
   learned of Sweden's decision to apply for membership of the European
   Union only when they read it in the newspapers. Some wonder if they
   might get the same nasty surprise about Sweden and NATO.

