
                                                                      AFP

                                    AFP

   The election returns more predictable politicians--and brings relief
   in Europe 


   THE era of the terrible twins is over. That is the upshot of the
   election on October 21st in which the ruling Law and Justice party, a
   populist and nationalist outfit, was swept aside by a more moderate
   and pro-European party, Civic Platform. On the highest turnout since
   the collapse of communism in 1989, almost 54% of Poles voted,
   including for the first time large numbers from the diaspora in
   western Europe. Civic Platform, under its leader, Donald Tusk (above),
   polled just over 41%, winning 209 seats in the 460-member lower house
   of parliament, an increase of 76 seats on the 2005 elections (see
   chart).

   Law and Justice, led by the outgoing prime minister, Jaroslaw
   Kaczynski, polled more votes than last time and even increased its
   seats by 11, thanks to the demise of two small populist parties that
   had been its on-off allies in the unstable governing coalition of the
   past two years. Mr Kaczynski's brother, Lech, remains president until
   2010, and may try to use various delaying powers to hamper the new
   government. But his veto can be overruled by a three-fifths vote in a
   quorate session of the lower house. With only 166 seats, Law and
   Justice cannot block that.

   The result was a surprise. For most of the campaign, Civic Platform
   had been lagging badly. The government seemed to have made the
   election a referendum about corruption, one of Poland's biggest
   problems in the post-communist era. That seemed to polarise opinion
   successfully: only the austere Mr Kaczynski and his zealous
   corruption-busters stood for change. Opposing them meant defending the
   sleazy practices of the past. A strong dose of social conservatism on
   issues such as homosexuality and abortion, though it appalled
   liberal-minded, middle-class opinion in the cities, went down well
   with the many traditionalist rural voters.

   The alarm and contempt with which the Kaczynskis were viewed abroad
   seemed to make little impact. Prickly, monoglot, untravelled and
   old-fashioned (neither uses a computer and Jaroslaw does not even have
   his own bank account), they embodied and exploited the inferiority
   complex felt by many Poles.

   But Law and Justice overdid it. The high-handed approach of the
   publicity-loving justice minister, Zbigniew Ziobro, and the
   appointment of a close Kaczynski political ally, Antoni Macierewicz,
   as the head of a new military counter-intelligence service caused
   widespread queasiness in the country. Coupled with a highly partisan
   approach to top appointments in supposedly neutral institutions such
   as public broadcasting, the Kaczynski way of doing things risked
   comparison with Vladimir Putin's authoritarian regime in Russia.

   Such fears were overdone. Polish democracy may have been bruised by
   the Kaczynski era, but it was not in danger. Voters were unconvinced
   by the Kaczynskis' sometimes hysterical claims of the dangers posed by
   the corrupt overlap of ex-spooks and ex-communists. The use of
   sometimes primitive and xenophobic language prompted younger,
   better-educated Poles, previously apathetic about domestic politics,
   to vote in large numbers.

   The turning-point of the campaign was the prime minister's humiliation
   by Mr Tusk in a televised debate. Mr Tusk used humour, calmness and
   command of the facts to flatten Mr Kaczynski, allegedly flu-ridden,
   who came across as bombastic and waffly. Mr Tusk highlighted Law and
   Justice's weakness on economics, such as an unfulfilled pledge to
   build 3m new homes. He also pointed out that 2m Poles had gone to seek
   work abroad.

   Law and Justice then made matters worse by overplaying their strongest
   card: anti-corruption. Earlier in the campaign, police had arrested a
   Civic Platform parliamentary deputy, Beata Sawicka, in a sting
   operation (she admits doing wrong, but accuses the government of
   acting unfairly). Her party immediately sacked her. But two weeks
   later the powerful anti-corruption agency set up by Law and Justice
   held a sensational press conference to show a film, shot secretly, of
   Ms Sawicka apparently taking a bribe. That seemed to have nothing to
   do with the rule of law and everything to do with the election
   campaign. When Ms Sawicka held a press conference the next day, during
   which she broke down in tears, Mr Kaczynski commented that the
   opposition was trying to use a weeping woman to win the election. The
   episode symbolised Law and Justice's worst side: petty, vindictive and
   crass.

   On many issues, Civic Platform and Law and Justice overlap. Both have
   their roots in the anti-communist dissident movement; both emphasise
   the importance of the Catholic church. The fundamental difference is
   in their attitude to the painful economic changes of the 1990s. Law
   and Justice represents the losers from that era; Civic Platform stands
   for those who did well out of it. The biggest difference now will be
   in the style of government. Civic Platform prides itself on its
   international credentials and competence. How much of that translates
   into real reform at home remains to be seen.

   But foreign policy will certainly be different. Mr Tusk wants Polish
   troops pulled out of Iraq, sooner rather than later. Under the likely
   foreign minister, Oxford-educated Radek Sikorski, Poland may drive a
   slightly tougher bargain with America over missile defence. It will
   try to be a more co-operative member of the EU, avoiding the
   unnecessary fights, especially with Germany, that typified the
   Kaczynski era. "We've always held a hand out towards the Poles; now
   maybe it will be shaken," says a German official. Law and Justice will
   see such rapprochements as treachery. But the voters thought
   otherwise.

