
                                                                      EPA

                                    EPA

   Can the chancellor's formula work as well in Germany as it seems to
   abroad?


   ANGELA MERKEL is proving a champion of the art of the possible. As she
   emerged tired but triumphant from a marathon summit in Brussels that
   agreed to a new European Union treaty, the German chancellor had again
   shown her skill in finding consensus where none seemed likely. She
   pulled off a similar trick at Heiligendamm three weeks ago, when she
   persuaded world leaders at the G8 summit, including America's George
   Bush, to make new pledges to combat climate change.

   Those close to her attribute her diplomatic successes to her emotional
   intelligence: an ability to put herself in the shoes of every
   protagonist in a complex multilateral chess game. And she keeps her
   cool. Even in the face of gratuitous anti-German comments from
   Jaroslaw Kaczynski, the Polish prime minister, she did not bite back.
   "She has fantastic timing," says Jürgen Falter, a political-science
   professor at Mainz University. She was even prepared to be upstaged in
   Brussels by Nicolas Sarkozy, the energetic French president (see
   [4]article), if it got the job done.

   Her other talent, as president of both the G8 for this year and the
   European Union until July 1st, has been to create the right atmosphere
   for co-operation. For example, she chose Meseberg, a baroque castle an
   hour outside Berlin, as a setting for informal talks before both
   summits. Even Vaclav Klaus, the touchy Eurosceptic Czech president,
   gave ground in a chat chaperoned by Roman Herzog, a former German
   president, to Ms Merkel's mix of charm and persistence.

   Ms Merkel and Mr Sarkozy represent a new generation of leaders of the
   big European powers. This week they were joined by Britain's Gordon
   Brown. The scratchiness, frigidity and occasional pomposity of their
   predecessors, Gerhard Schröder, Jacques Chirac and Tony Blair, who
   between them have dominated European debate for around a decade, are a
   thing of the past, as is the biggest bone of contention: the decision
   to go to war in Iraq in March 2003. Although the new triumvirate is
   starting on good terms, it remains to be seen how well they get along
   when it comes to bigger European arguments--though one certainty is
   that Europe's relations with America can only improve.

   On the home front

   The question being asked in Germany is whether Ms Merkel's new
   diplomatic magic can help to win her another term of office at home.
   There is no doubting her personal popularity. The latest opinion polls
   show that 55% of voters would like her to remain chancellor if an
   election were held tomorrow. But her position depends on the survival
   of the grand coalition between two big parties that usually oppose
   each other: her own Christian Democrats (CDU) and the Social Democrats
   (SPD).

   Most pundits expect the coalition to last its full term, until
   September 2009. But the strain between the odd bedfellows is showing.
   Kurt Beck, the SPD leader, recently accused the CDU of being
   "neo-liberal", a term of abuse that even German conservatives cannot
   stomach: all parties except the centrist Free Democrats (FDP) profess
   full support for a social-market economy. Franz Müntefering, a former
   SPD leader who is now vice-chancellor and is normally fiercely loyal
   to the grand coalition, broke ranks on June 19th. After a scrappy
   compromise was reached to avoid introducing a nationwide minimum wage,
   he openly accused Ms Merkel of party politicking. The first shots have
   been fired in what could turn into a two-year election campaign that
   may paralyse the government less than halfway through its term.

   There are signs of panic on both sides of the grand coalition. The CDU
   (with its Bavarian sister party, the Christian Social Union) scores an
   average of 37% in today's polls. It would need over 40% to form a
   government with its preferred partner, the FDP. The SPD, whose support
   has slid to some 26%, has two big problems: doubts about Mr Beck as
   its leader and the full emergence of the Left Party as a rival. Both
   coalition partners feel the need to create some clear blue water
   between them by redefining what they stand for.

   In response, theCDU has blurred its image a bit by espousing green and
   social causes, such as the environment and the family, and throwing
   more money than it had planned at social policies such as health,
   welfare and child care. For its part the SPD needs to escape
   association with its two heavy-hitters in the cabinet, Peer
   Steinbrück, the finance minister, and Frank-Walter Steinmeier, the
   foreign minister. These men may be doing a good job for their country
   but they are certainly not helping their party. Mr Beck, a popular
   premier in Rhineland-Palatinate, has been unable to extend his appeal
   farther north. There are no promising contenders for his job, save
   perhaps Mr Steinmeier. But this former head of Gerhard Schröder's
   private office is not an elected politician and has no grassroots
   support.

   The most charismatic man on the left is Oskar Lafontaine, who once led
   the SPD but now co-heads the Left Party. This party comes from a
   merger of WASG, a labour union, with the predominantly eastern German
   Democratic Socialists, most of whom are ex-communists. It has, says
   Oskar Niedermayer, a political-science professor at Berlin's Free
   University, caused a one-time shift in Germany's political balance of
   power. Given the continuing strength of the Greens, any future
   government (other than another grand coalition) will probably have to
   embrace three parties, not two.

   Ms Merkel's party must contemplate a deal not only with the FDP but
   also with the Greens, to make a "Jamaica" (after that island's flag)
   coalition. The weakened SPD may need a coalition that includes not
   just the Greens, its usual partner, but also the FDP or the Left
   Party. The SPD and the Left Party are unlikely to do business so long
   as Mr Lafontaine is around. He stormed out of Mr Schröder's cabinet
   and the SPD in 1999; the party's old guard refuses to deal with him.
   Yet the siren-like Mr Lafontaine tried to woo the SPD in an interview
   this week, saying that, if certain conditions were met, such as the
   minimum wage and pulling German troops out of Afghanistan, "Beck can
   be chancellor tomorrow."

   As panic rises, the SPD rank and file may come to see this as an
   appealing way out of their party's straitjacket. But for the time
   being it is more likely that the grand coalition will stick together.
   That gives Ms Merkel two years to come up trumps on the domestic as
   well as the international front. She may have to start wooing the
   Greens, as well as building more grassroots support in her own party.
   The strongest CDU figures are the state premiers, notably Roland Koch
   in Hesse and Christian Wulff in Lower Saxony. But their support would
   be two-edged, since each has ambitions to be chancellor. Ms Merkel's
   most important ally may be Ursula von der Leyen, the family minister,
   who has successfully encroached on SPD territory.

   The usual mistake of Ms Merkel's opponents has been to underestimate
   her. But the cards stacked against her at home may mean that
   practising the art of the possible is no longer enough for success.

