
   The government survives--and stirs a debate on responses to kidnappers
   
   ROMANO PRODI'S shaky centre-left government this week laid to rest, at
   least for now, the issue that almost caused it to collapse last month.
   On March 27th the upper-house Senate voted to keep paying for Italian
   troops abroad. Some 2,000 are in Afghanistan, where Italy's engagement
   is a source of anguished misgiving for the radical and pacifist left.
   Mr Prodi can no longer count on a majority in the Senate; in February
   a rebellion by two far-left senators, prompted by Afghanistan, almost
   brought his government down.

                                                                      AFP
                                                                      AFP

                                          A freedom fag for Mastrogiacomo

   This week, Mr Prodi won a majority thanks to support from unelected
   life senators and from rebels within the centre-right opposition. That
   made the outcome more damaging to the main opposition leader, Silvio
   Berlusconi. Mr Berlusconi saw the vote as a chance to defeat the
   government, but others on the right felt they could not refuse support
   for Italian troops. They included a member of Mr Berlusconi's own
   party and all 20 senators from the Union of Christian Democrats (UDC),
   the third-biggest party in the centre-right alliance that lost the
   election in April 2006.

   With one former UDC senator having already deserted to the
   centre-left, there is speculation that the party could become a
   semi-detached backer of Mr Prodi. The UDC's leader, Pier Ferdinando
   Casini, has ruled this out. But he appeared to leave open the
   possibility of joining a rejigged coalition, arguing that Italy needs
   a more stable government. Unfortunately, the UDC, whose power base is
   in the south, is notoriously chary of the liberal economic reforms
   that Italy also needs.

   Since the lower house had already approved an identical motion on
   funding, Italy's contribution to the NATO-led forces in Afghanistan is
   assured for another year. Yet the ripples caused by Italy's anguish
   over Afghanistan continue to spread--and this week lapped at NATO
   itself. NATO's secretary-general, Jaap de Hoop Scheffer, said that he
   would begin talks over forming a common response to hostage-taking.
   His initiative seems to have been prompted by Italy's handling of the
   March 4th kidnapping by the Taliban of an Italian journalist, Daniele
   Mastrogiacomo.

   In Italy the kidnap revived misgivings about any involvement in
   Afghanistan, increasing the risk of a government defeat in the Senate.
   But it also teased out some big differences between Italy and most of
   its allies. Italy is influenced by Roman Catholic views on the
   sanctity of life. It also has a history of paying ransom money.

   It is not clear if the Taliban were after a degree of political
   acceptance or concrete gains. But they got both: talks, albeit
   indirect, with the Italian authorities, and the release of five
   prisoners (including, reportedly, the brother of the Taliban's top
   commander, Mullah Dadullah). The five men had been held by the Afghan
   authorities, who said they were freed "because we value our relations
   and friendship with Italy". This remark suggests that the Italians had
   threatened to breach the allies' united front in Afghanistan if they
   did not get what they wanted.

   Italy is not the only country to have struck a deal with insurgents.
   Germany is suspected of paying several multi-million dollar ransoms,
   notably for the release in 2005 of an archaeologist held in Iraq. But
   Mr Mastrogiacomo was the latest of at least half a dozen Italian
   hostages in different parts of the world who are thought to have been
   ransomed in the past two years. And rarely has a deal been as openly
   acknowledged as this one. NATO is right to be debating the problem.

