
   Vladimir Putin asserts his country's place in the world


   LONG-LEGGED beauties in G-strings; fashion models in thigh-length red
   boots; even Ramzan Kadyrov, the Chechen warlord-turned-president,
   sporting a diamond-studded belt. All were on display in St Petersburg
   last week, along with a bevy of the world's top corporate bosses,
   political leaders and diplomats, at the annual economic forum, which
   has become a showcase of Russia's economic resurgence under Vladimir
   Putin.

   It was also, in a way, a microcosm of Russia. Those obsessed over who
   might succeed Mr Putin in 2008 noted that Sergei Ivanov, one of two
   front-runners, gave a presidential-style opening speech, but his
   rival, Dmitry Medvedev, was merely invited to sit on a panel. Mr
   Ivanov said that Russia would soon become the fifth-largest economy in
   the world. He also promised to fight red tape and graft.

   Both ills seemed evident at the forum. The event was cordoned off from
   the public; even those who were accredited were restricted in their
   movements. A chief executive of one big company was apparently asked
   for sponsorship money; when he refused he found his hotel reservation
   cancelled. Yet foreign investors' appetite for Russian assets seems to
   be heartier than ever. None of the bosses who met Mr Putin behind
   closed doors made a fuss about Russia's investment climate. Jeroen van
   der Veer, the boss of Royal Dutch Shell, which recently had to cede
   control over its giant Sakhalin 2 project to Gazprom, even stood up
   and thanked the president. Despite the rough treatment of some foreign
   companies and worsening relations with the West, business deals are
   still coming thick and fast.

   Arriving fresh from the G8 summit, Mr Putin asserted his place in the
   world and wrote off existing global organisations as archaic,
   undemocratic and unwieldy. "The world is changing before our very
   eyes," he said. "Countries that seemed hopelessly backward only
   yesterday are becoming the world's fastest-growing economies today."
   Russia no longer wanted simply to be part of the world's outdated
   architecture, but to change it, he told a panel that included Pascal
   Lamy, head of the World Trade Organisation, Peter Mandelson, the
   European trade commissioner, and Francis Fukuyama, a political
   scientist.

   To remind the world of Russia's foreign-policy ambitions, Mr Putin
   invited Vojislav Kostunica, Serbia's prime minister, to the forum. Mr
   Kostunica thanked Russia for being a staunch opponent of the
   independence of Kosovo. A few days earlier Mr Putin had brushed aside
   a proposal by Nicolas Sarkozy, the new French president, to give Serbs
   and Albanians another six months to negotiate. "Our position on Kosovo
   is based on international law and on the decisions adopted by the UN
   Security Council. This resolution states black on white that Kosovo is
   an integral part of Serbia," Mr Putin said. The Russians also ask, if
   Kosovo is granted independence, why not the two breakaway republics of
   Abkhazia and South Ossetia in Georgia?

   This week the Russians summoned an emergency meeting in Vienna to
   berate the West in their row over the status of the Conventional
   Forces in Europe treaty, a post cold-war deal. And Mr Putin has also
   managed, at least for now, to outmanoeuvre the Americans over missile
   defences in Europe. At the G8 meeting he offered joint use of a radar
   that Russia leases from Azerbaijan instead (see [4]article). Yet one
   former official in Washington says the same idea was floated five
   years ago. Discussion of it led nowhere then, and is even less likely
   to bear fruit now.

