
   What a reduction in abstraction says about the new France


   OF ALL the novelties of France under President Nicolas Sarkozy, one of
   the more arresting is the decline of the abstract noun. In the past,
   no French leader would make a speech without liberal doses of destiny
   and history. In one speech Mr Sarkozy's predecessor, Jacques Chirac,
   squeezed 13 abstract nouns--unity, liberty, humanity and more--into a
   single sentence. He was almost outdone by his prime minister (and
   part-time poet), Dominique de Villepin, who came up with the
   declaration: "Globalisation is not an ideal, it cannot be our
   destiny."

   The contrast with the wordcraft of Mr Sarkozy is instructive. In his
   first big foreign-policy speech, he managed in 18 pages to utter
   neither the word glory nor the word grandeur. Unlike his British
   counterparts, who favour verbless sentences, Mr Sarkozy is a
   verbaholic. According to a linguistic analysis of his campaign
   speeches by Damon Mayaffre, of the University of Nice, one of Mr
   Sarkozy's most frequent words is I, usually followed by the verb want.

   What does this say about France? One answer is that the country has a
   hyperactive president, constantly on the go, who expects the French to
   be so too. "Work more to earn more" was his slogan, and his use of
   verbs matches the message. This is a man who likes to jog, where
   previous presidents preferred a dignified stroll. Indeed, his
   predilection prompted Libération, a left-leaning newspaper, to ask,
   "Is jogging right-wing?" It even moved a philosopher, Alain
   Finkielkraut, to implore the president to take up the promenade--a
   "spiritual experience"--and to give up jogging, which is mere "body
   management".

   Another explanation is that Mr Sarkozy is challenging the French
   tradition of conceptualism. Intellectuals, long cherished by the
   establishment, get short shrift now. "It's an old national habit:
   France is a country that thinks," said Christine Lagarde, the finance
   minister, in a speech on the value of work, before adding: "Enough
   thinking now! Let's roll up our sleeves." This week, Mr Sarkozy
   sneered at French philosophers during the visit of Libya's Muammar
   Qaddafi to Paris, accusing them of sipping coffee in Left Bank cafés
   while others got things done. As for France's famously rigid school
   curriculum, he has little fondness for it. Too much time is spent, he
   has declared, "on doctrine, theory and abstraction", and not enough on
   practical applications. How long will it be before he has a go at the
   national motto, a veritable wealth of abstraction: Liberty, Equality,
   Fraternity?

