
   Can fish fish themselves? Only in one of the European Union's maddest
   schemes



   IN RATIONAL systems of government, officials do not enjoy hearing that
   one of their policies is a shambles. Yet that is what happened when
   the Court of Auditors recently declared that the European Union's
   common fisheries policy (CFP), under which the European Commission
   sets maximum allowable catches, does not work. The auditors found that
   the actual level of catches is "unknown", thanks to gaps, errors and
   "mis-statements" (ie, fibs) in data sent to Brussels by national
   governments. Most rule-breakers are not caught; those caught are
   seldom punished; and the few who are punished face trifling fines.
   Schemes to reduce overcapacity in fishing fleets have been subverted.
   This has severe effects. A survey of the north-east Atlantic found 81%
   of fish stocks to be dangerously over-exploited.

   So why does the commission welcome this damning report? Because
   enforcing the CFP is largely a job for national governments. That
   turns the report into ammunition in a fight between Brussels and
   national capitals over who is to blame. One commission official
   insists that "on controls, it is the member states' fault." The list
   of cheats features Italy ("really bad"), Poland ("bad") and Spain ("a
   bad reputation round the world, for hidden compartments, illegal nets,
   the lot"). It also includes those who most criticise the CFP, such as
   the Dutch and British (Scotland was notorious for "black" landings,
   but has improved after nasty scandals). It is the same with
   over-fishing. Each autumn the commission proposes new limits. But the
   actual quotas are fixed every Christmas by national ministers in a
   sleepless, two-day marathon.

   The annual fisheries council (this year's begins on December 17th) is
   described by one official as "the sickest thing about the CFP". It
   even has its own, squalid traditions. Before the council, the
   commission proposes quotas that are larger than those recommended by
   its scientific advisers. National ministers then expand the quotas
   once again. In recent years, the final numbers have been 50% higher
   than the scientists advised. And then national fishing fleets break
   even these higher quotas.

   To most Eurocrats, the problem is selfish national interests, and the
   solution is tougher EU-wide controls. The CFP may be flawed, but if
   countries parcelled out the fish among themselves there would be none
   left, says one official. "We'd be discussing where to import fish
   from." To Eurosceptics, the blame rests with the EU: the CFP has
   forfeited the confidence of fishermen and the public (who are
   disgusted that quotas force fishermen to chuck dead fish back into the
   sea). Their answer is to keep Brussels out. British sceptics even
   murmur, eyes a-gleam, about Royal Navy warships patrolling to keep out
   foreign interlopers. (They are less good at explaining how British
   fishermen could stop the neighbours from over-fishing in non-British
   waters.)

   National governments like to spread the blame around too. Some even
   admit that their fishermen cheat. A 2004 report by the British prime
   minister's strategy unit called low levels of compliance in the
   industry "endemic". But the prize for unintentional comedy goes to
   France, whose officials once blamed the fish for a huge court fine
   slapped on French authorities for allowing illegal landings. (The ploy
   turned on a daring, if grammatically correct, use of reflexive verbs,
   so that a ministerial statement blamed undersized hake that se
   pêchaient et se vendaient, suggesting the fish had fished and sold
   themselves.)

   Apart from the fish-blaming French, everybody has a point. The
   behaviour of national governments is simply the tragedy of the commons
   writ large. One official admits that discarding dead cod because they
   breach quotas is "obscene". The commission is studying the policy of
   Norway, where all fish must be landed, and over-quota fish are bought
   by the state for a modest sum. Clever nets could help in southerly
   waters, where dozens of species swim together. Officials also grumble
   about hypocrisy: fishermen quietly discard lots of fish so as to pack
   their holds only with the most valuable. Many fishermen cheat because
   they think the scientists are wrong, or because everyone else is, or
   because they cannot make a living otherwise.

   The force of the market

   In the end, though, arguments about how to control national fishing
   fleets miss the biggest point. A bolder reform would create a
   pan-European market in fishing rights, in which efficient skippers
   could buy, sell and rent tradable quotas (used in places like New
   Zealand, and also as domestic policy tools in parts of Europe). The
   resulting Euro-fleet would be smaller and easier to contain. It would
   also need fewer controls, as owners of big expensive boats have more
   incentive to preserve stocks.

   A Spanish official says that his country, with a competitive fishing
   industry, would support a single European market, at least for
   offshore fleets. The Dutch might be interested. Unfortunately, that is
   about it. Even the British are protectionist about fish, forcing
   foreigners who want to buy their quotas to maintain a lifetime
   "economic link" with Britain by hiring British crews, or landing fish
   in British ports.

   Politicians' heads tell them that fishing accounts for less than 1% of
   the EU's economy. Their hearts say it is a brave, dangerous business,
   bringing life to isolated ports where other jobs are hard to come by.
   Emotion helps to explain a (mad) founding principle of the CFP:
   "relative stability". This means that the share of fish stocks doled
   out to each country should be stable in relative terms, so that no
   national fleet loses ground to any other. This rigidity has blocked
   serious consolidation, as member countries cling to every last quota
   they can get.

   Europeans need to stop blaming each other for the failures of the
   current CFP. Instead, they should ponder the example of one of the
   EU's few uncontested triumphs, the single market, and apply its
   lessons to the seas. That would be rational. It might even be good for
   the fish.

