
   The brutal suppression of peaceful protests says much about the
   dangerously unfettered mood in the Kremlin


   SHORTLY after noon on April 14th, Russian riot police--known as the
   OMON--dragged a young man holding a bunch of flowers off the pavement
   near Pushkin Square in central Moscow. As he was thrown into a van, he
   braced his feet against the doors, to cheers from the crowd, but to
   the evident ire of the police. The doors were repeatedly slammed
   against his legs. An officer who climbed inside then appeared to beat
   him.

   The thousands of soldiers and police who mustered in the streets for
   the day gave Moscow an air of war. They came to quash a protest by
   Other Russia, a disparate coalition of President Vladimir Putin's
   critics. When a small group bypassed the cordons around the square and
   began shouting "freedom", the OMON rushed in. Copies of the
   constitution that the group had been carrying were trampled; Garry
   Kasparov, a former chess champion, was pulled from a restaurant. The
   OMON beat everybody nearby, including journalists, with truncheons and
   fists. And they arrested people indiscriminately, among them the man
   with the flowers, a group of transvestites and even a small boy.

   The excuse for all this was that the authorities had denied permission
   for Other Russia to rally in Pushkin Square. That refusal was itself
   one of the gnawing, pseudo-legal methods used to harass Russia's
   meagre opposition. The claim was made that a fake pro-Kremlin youth
   group had lodged an identical request only moments before Other Russia
   did. A handful of counter-protesters duly appeared on a roof, where
   they let off flares and insulted those below; the police did nothing.
   A few nationalists also gathered later in the day, with posters
   showing Jews clutching severed heads of Russian babies and making Nazi
   salutes.

   There had been grim pre-emptive warnings about the treatment that
   "illegal" protesters could expect, which were amply fulfilled. As a
   gritty snow fell, a few hundred tried to march to Turgenev Square,
   where a meeting had been sanctioned, chanting slogans such as "Down
   with Chekist power" and "We need another Russia". Mikhail Kasyanov,
   once Mr Putin's prime minister, now a critic, was jostled; his
   bodyguards were arrested. A small peaceful group was intercepted by
   the OMON. An old man tried to save an old woman from arrest; a dozen
   club-wielding men viciously attacked both. Vladimir Ryzhkov, an
   independent member of parliament whose party and seat are both
   disappearing under new political rules, advised everyone to go home.

   The thousand-odd who managed to reach Turgenev Square were surrounded
   by soldiers. When the time allowed for the meeting expired, they were
   driven off. Andrei Illarionov, a former economic adviser to Mr Putin,
   vainly read extracts from the Russian criminal code to an OMON
   officer. He and others were forced into a metro station. Later Mr
   Kasparov was ludicrously convicted and fined for shouting
   anti-government slogans. Supporters and journalists who gathered
   outside the police station were beaten again.

   The next day the action moved on to sunny St Petersburg, where Mr
   Putin himself first learned his trade in the KGB. Gazprom's plans to
   build a tower, and the exclusion of Yabloko, a liberal party, from a
   regional election, had contributed to an unusually large protest there
   in March. This time, the authorities were better prepared. As in
   Moscow, several would-be participants in Other Russia's meeting were
   detained in advance. Only around 1,000 gathered for a suffocatingly
   policed demonstration. "I believe Putin is the most dangerous criminal
   in Russia", read one man's placard, which bravely specified his name
   and address. "I love you, OMON", said another.

   The feeling was not reciprocated. As in Moscow, reinforcements were
   summoned from outside, perhaps because they would be less squeamish
   about pummelling the locals. "Are you going to beat us all?", an old
   woman asked an officer in battle gear, as protesters were funnelled
   away from tourists on Nevsky Prospekt. Shortly afterwards they did.
   When a group reached Vitebsky railway station, the OMON blocked their
   path, banged their riot shields and charged, skull-cracked and
   arrested at random. People waiting for buses and drunks sleeping on
   benches were caught in the frenzy. Eduard Limonov, the leader of
   another banned organisation, was arrested.

   The Kremlin says that its Other Russia critics are insignificant, and
   in a way it is right. Even were they not denied access to television
   (newspapers and radio stations who interview them also risk
   prosecution), the part-Jewish, part-Armenian Mr Kasparov and his
   allies would not command much support. Ordinary Russians can be
   stirred by tangible worries such as welfare reform, but for most of
   them freedom is about foreign holidays and a new television, not
   politics. Still, last weekend's excesses matter because of three
   things they reveal about the regime.

   First, the old Soviet neurosis about public meetings has been stoked
   to paranoia by Ukraine's "orange revolution" of 2004, which some in
   the Kremlin saw as a Western-sponsored coup. Since dissent must
   reflect foreign meddling, they see Other Russia as a Western stooge,
   part of a covert operation to destabilise the country. As with so many
   authoritarian rulers, they may be unsure how popular they are.

   Second, ahead of next year's presidential election the Kremlin is set
   on intimidating any opponents into quiescence, whatever the cost to
   Russia's reputation. Some may also want to send a message to foreign
   enemies, including exiles in London such as Boris Berezovsky.

   Yet Mr Putin is not Stalin. Nobody was killed at the protests, though
   hundreds were arrested and dozens hospitalised. But the third lesson
   is that the ruthless paranoiacs who run Russia are utterly unfettered
   in what they choose to do. Parliament is unlikely to investigate the
   huge cost of the gratuitous mobilisation. Suborned courts convicted
   innocent people of imaginary offences. The scant coverage on the main
   television channels made no mention of the man with the flowers or the
   brutalised old couple, and called those who demonstrated
   "ultra-radicals".

