
   The economy is likely to slow sharply next year, but that may not be
   enough to revive the cause of reform



   GERMANY had no property bubble. Its workers have long settled for
   modest pay rises. Its businesses and its consumers have been prudent
   about debt. Recent governments have endured political pain to enact
   growth-boosting reforms. Yet none of these things will spare Europe's
   largest economy from the turbulence beyond its borders. In a global
   slowdown, Germany's three-year-old economic recovery is likely to
   continue, but at a slower pace. In a way this is a pity, for only the
   prospect of more serious meltdown could goad Germany's political
   leaders to make further reforms.

   At first sight Germany looks well placed to cope with adversity. It is
   one of few countries to "reindustrialise", notes Bert Rürup, head of a
   committee of economists who advise the government. This is largely
   built on its prowess as an exporter, especially of capital goods. Less
   than 9% of Germany's exports go to the United States, so its direct
   exposure to an American slowdown is modest. Buyers of German machines
   are less sensitive to price than, say, consumers of Italian clothes,
   offering some protection against a strong euro. The credit crunch
   begun by the American subprime-mortgage mess will rattle Mediterranean
   companies more than German ones, which finance themselves mainly out
   of profits. "The private sector is not overstretched at all," says
   Dirk Schumacher of Goldman Sachs.

   Even so, German growth is expected to sag, from about 2.6% this year
   to 2% or less in 2008 (see chart). And that actually overstates the
   economy's strength. The 2008 forecast is boosted by an overhang from
   this year's strong growth and by some extra working days (February
   29th, for example). Without these props, growth might be just 1.1%,
   says the Kiel Institute for the World Economy. In 2009 it may bounce
   back, but only to 1.8%. Export growth is likely to fall from 8% in
   2007 to 5.6% in 2008 and 4.8% in 2009, predicts the Ifo research
   institute in Munich. Investment growth will weaken, largely because a
   corporate-tax law taking effect on January 1st will stop businesses
   from writing off factories and equipment so rapidly.

   Fortunately 2008 is supposed to be the year of the consumer. In 2007
   shoppers were sideswiped by a sharp increase in value-added tax and by
   jumps in food and energy prices. In November annual inflation hit a
   14-year high of 3.1%. But in the meantime job creation, plus a pick-up
   in pay, have put extra cash into consumers' pockets. In 2008 they
   should begin to spend it. The risk that they will not, along with the
   possibility of a serious American slump, are the main threats to the
   economy next year. After a slow start, Christmas shopping has met
   "merchants' high expectations", reports the German Retail Association.

   In the longer run German growth prospects will depend more on
   politicians' progress with reforms than on the whims of consumers.
   Since 2003 political leaders have helped, first under Gerhard
   Schröder, a Social Democratic chancellor, and now under his Christian
   Democratic successor, Angela Merkel, who leads a "grand coalition"
   with the Social Democrats as junior partners. Labour-market reforms
   have added a fifth of a percentage point to German growth potential,
   mainly by drawing unskilled and older workers back into employment,
   reckons the Bundesbank. The government has restrained overall spending
   but is starting to raise investment, a further boost to growth.

   Lately, however, Germany's leaders seem to have lost their nerve.
   Reforms have met popular hostility not applause; voters seem to crave
   economic justice more than growth. Fewer people now describe their
   situation as "good" or "very good" than did five years ago, when the
   economy was in worse shape, according to a survey by Allensbach, a
   pollster. More than half the population thinks that economic
   conditions are "unjust". This mood unnerves both main parties in the
   grand coalition. Each hopes to govern without the other after the next
   election in 2009. The Social Democrats, the original authors of
   Germany's reforms, are panicked by the rise of the anti-reform Left
   party. And Ms Merkel is positioning her Christian Democrats as the
   party of "the middle", which means sticking with reforms only if the
   political price is not too high.

   And so the coalition has started to whittle away at Germany's growth
   prospects. In November it decided to extend the duration of
   unemployment benefits paid to older workers, which will encourage
   employers to dismiss more during the next downswing. Then it agreed to
   introduce a minimum wage in the postal industry, upsetting
   competitors' plans to challenge Deutsche Post when its monopoly of
   letter delivery expires on January 1st. On their own such retreats
   will cause minor economic damage, but Alfred Boss of the Kiel
   Institute worries that "steps in the wrong direction will multiply" in
   the next few months. There is talk of extending the minimum wage and
   of tightening the regulation of temporary work, which accounts for
   much recent job creation.

   The upswing has increased the government's revenues and so the
   temptation to spend. Already it has chopped the payroll tax that
   finances unemployment insurance, which should encourage employment but
   may erase the federal labour agency's surplus in the next downturn.
   The government wants to spend more on children and vocational
   training, but may not be ready to make offsetting cuts, for instance
   in subsidies to farming or the railways, to pay for them. Its plan to
   balance the budget by 2011, which once looked easy, may be in danger,
   fears Mr Boss.

   Hans-Werner Sinn, Ifo's president, thinks this is a counterattack
   against globalisation that could last for decades. He sees the
   creeping introduction of a minimum wage as a "fundamental change" in
   Germany's liberal tradition of letting markets set prices and dealing
   with inequality through taxes and spending. That may prove too
   pessimistic. So far, the reversals championed by the Social Democrats
   seem to be aimed at gaining big political payoffs at low economic
   costs. Still, driving in reverse makes it harder to bring in further
   reforms of health care, labour markets or the welfare state. There is
   little prospect of daring moves until after the 2009 election. And
   even then, it may take another bout of economic pain to make anything
   happen.

