
   An election is called, emergency rule is ended, but the damage lingers


   TO A visitor who has not seen Georgia since the "rose revolution" of
   2003, the changes are stunning. Grand buildings ruined by war and
   neglect have been restored. Where there was night-time gloom there is
   now light. Roads have been repaired and chronic energy shortages are a
   thing of the past. Money is being poured into infrastructure and
   schools.

   In Batumi, which in 2003 was outside central-government control, new
   hotels sprout everywhere. In the past two years Armenian tourists have
   returned. One reason is that, after the rose revolution, President
   Mikheil Saakashvili sacked all the traffic police, who had previously
   done little except extract cash from anybody on the roads. "It used to
   cost $100 in bribes to drive here from Armenia," says Levan
   Varshalomidze, head of Batumi's local government. This year the
   Georgian economy should grow by 10%, despite a Russian economic
   blockade.

   This all makes recent events in Georgia more depressing. On November
   7th the government cleared opposition protesters from Tbilisi's main
   street after five days of demonstrations. The move went wrong as the
   opposition called in reinforcements, provoking riot police into
   liberal use of batons and tear-gas. A state of emergency was declared
   and opposition television stations were taken off the air. The next
   day Mr Saakashvili declared that he would hold a snap presidential
   election on January 5th. "You wanted early elections," he said. "Have
   them even earlier!" This week the government announced the lifting of
   the state of emergency, too.

   At the start of the protests, Salome Zourabichvili, a former French
   ambassador who became Georgia's foreign minister before being sacked
   by Mr Saakashvili, said that the government liked to show
   reconstruction to foreigners to mislead them. "We are living in a
   Potemkin country," she scoffed. This is unfair, but life is hard for
   most Georgians. Former industrial towns such as Zestaponi and Kutaisi
   remain devastated by the collapse of the Soviet Union. The countryside
   is dotted with skeletal remnants of factories. One of Georgia's
   biggest exports is scrap metal.

   Expectations of Mr Saakashvili were so high that they could only be
   dashed. Alex Rondeli, an analyst, suggests that part of the problem is
   that no politician who wants to stay in office can be truly honest
   about how long rebuilding Georgia is going to take. "It will take
   time," he says, "more than one generation." Mr Saakashvili and his
   friends have been tough and acted quickly, but in the process they
   have made enemies. Many claim that Mr Saakashvili has let power go to
   his head.

   If he is no longer half as popular at home (and abroad) as he once
   was, it still seems likely that he will win the presidential election.
   Badri Patarkatsishvili, a tycoon, has declared that he will run. The
   opposition is furious because this may divide the anti-Saakashvili
   vote. According to David Usupashvili, leader of the Republican Party,
   the aim of the ten-party opposition coalition, who have chosen Levan
   Gachechiladze, a former businessman, as their candidate, is to scrap
   the present presidential system. "We are not searching for a better
   Saakashvili," he says.

   The opposition may suffer from claims that some of its leaders were in
   contact with Russian spies during the protests. Russia still backs two
   breakaway Georgian enclaves, Abkhazia and South Ossetia. As Giga
   Bokeria, an associate of Mr Saakashvili's, notes, "Moscow's declared
   goal here is regime change." That is why European and American attacks
   on the government's crackdown on the Tbilisi protests have caused
   irritation. Outsiders report that Mr Saakashvili is in high spirits,
   untroubled by the criticisms, which he brushes aside as ill-informed.
   Mr Rondeli notes of Russia that "we are in a cage with a cruel dog who
   is biting us. We are asking Europe to open the cage and let us out but
   all they say is: `be nice to the dog.'"

