
   The significance of France's military base in the Gulf 

                                                              Alphafrance

                                Alphafrance

              Down the Champs Elysées, and out into the world


   FRANCE'S announcement this week that it is to open a military base in
   the United Arab Emirates could mark a strategic shift in its defence
   policy. It will be France's first permanent base in the Gulf, in a
   country where it has no colonial ties. By drawing its 400 troops from
   an existing base in Djibouti, it hints at a withdrawal from France's
   traditional African backyard. Moreover, coming in the middle of
   France's first full defence review for 14 years, it suggests a radical
   rethinking of the country's defence and security policy.

   The future of French overseas military bases is one element under
   review. France now has around 5,000 soldiers in three permanent bases
   in Africa: Senegal, Gabon and Djibouti. It also has 2,600 soldiers on
   a peacekeeping mission in Côte d'Ivoire, and 1,100 on the ground in
   Chad soon to be joined by another 2,000 as part of a French-led
   European Union force. Ties of history keep French soldiers in Africa.
   But President Nicolas Sarkozy has told the defence review team to
   "construct the security and defence of tomorrow according to needs,
   not habits".

   Mr Sarkozy has pre-empted his own review's conclusions, not due till
   March, by announcing the Emirates base, just across the Gulf from
   Iran. It shows that the French are ready to move outside their
   traditional sphere and to match their military presence to strategic
   interests rather than colonial links. Although the base will be small,
   it also suggests that Mr Sarkozy, who has taken a tougher line on Iran
   than his predecessor, may be ready to take a bigger part in
   stabilising the region.

   There could be more surprises to come. Jean-Claude Mallet, head of the
   defence review, says it aims to define a "new doctrine" of security
   and defence. Mr Sarkozy has told him nothing should be taboo. A white
   paper is due in the spring and legislation is planned by the summer.

   One idea is that France should set up a National Defence and Security
   Council, loosely modelled on the American version, to co-ordinate
   domestic and foreign security. Another suggestion will be a commitment
   to maintain defence spending at about 2% of GDP, roughly the same as
   in Britain. Despite defence-spending increases, French military types
   complain about the lack of transport aircraft and the shoddy state of
   the helicopter fleet.

   Perhaps the trickiest issue is France's role in NATO. It is a member,
   and participates in many NATO operations: one-third of the 10,000
   French soldiers on missions abroad are under a NATO banner; a French
   general commands the NATO force in Kosovo. But since de Gaulle pulled
   France out of the alliance's integrated military command in 1966, it
   has had no say in NATO defence planning. Mr Sarkozy, who likes to make
   a splash and please the Americans in equal measure, has hinted
   strongly that France could soon rejoin fully.

   Not, however, without one key condition: more progress on European
   defence. Mr Sarkozy, in short, wants the British to back European
   defence properly, and the Americans to stop distrusting this on the
   ground that it may be a rival to NATO.

   The trouble is that Gordon Brown, Britain's prime minister, is in no
   hurry to pursue anything that has the slightest whiff of deeper
   European integration, especially with the EU's reform treaty still
   before the British parliament for ratification. Relations between Mr
   Sarkozy and Mr Brown are businesslike rather than warm. They may not
   be helped by the ostentatious love-in between Mr Sarkozy and Tony
   Blair, who spoke (in French) to rapturous applause at an event
   organised by the president's centre-right party last weekend. The
   French have found it hard to drum up support for the EU force in Chad:
   neither the British, who are stretched in Iraq and Afghanistan, nor
   the Germans are sending any troops.

   French officials are frustrated by the lack of British response to
   their hints about NATO. But it is hard to see room for compromise.
   Something less than a full-blown EU defence headquarters would not
   satisfy the French; anything too grand or NATO-duplicating would not
   get past the British. As one French official puts it, however,
   "Sarkozy will not accept no response. If he doesn't get agreement,
   he'll go somewhere else." There is even talk of dealing directly with
   America, doubtless pleased with France's planned Emirates base. But it
   is hard to see that working in America's fraught election year.

