
   France looks forward to more controversial reforms and more
   protests--all at a time when the European economy is slowing

                                                                  Reuters

                                  Reuters


   THE economic mood may be souring fast, but Nicolas Sarkozy still
   managed to bring some festive cheer to his electorate over the holiday
   period. His liaison with Carla Bruni, a Franco-Italian singer and
   one-time supermodel, whom he took on an official-trip-cum-holiday to
   Egypt, was splashed on every magazine cover and seemed to fill the
   airwaves for days on end. But even the latest chapter in the
   presidential family soap opera may not be enough to distract the
   voters from harsher times ahead: a fresh batch of reforms against a
   backdrop of rising prices and weakening economic growth.

   "Despite the obstacles, despite the difficulties, I will do what I
   said I would," vowed Mr Sarkozy in his televised new year's message
   this week. The diary of reforms planned for the coming months is
   certainly full. January 15th is the (revised) deadline for trade
   unions and employers to reach agreement on how to loosen France's
   rigid labour laws. Under discussion, among other matters, are the
   country's tough redundancy rules and highly protected work contracts,
   which have discouraged job creation. The idea is to secure more
   flexibility for employers, in return for greater efforts to improve
   training and salaries for employees. But the talks have been
   predictably difficult, not least because Mr Sarkozy has let it be
   known that, if no deal is reached by the new deadline, the government
   will legislate anyway.

   François Fillon, his prime minister, has just added two extra items to
   the labour-market negotiations. One is to make the financing of the
   unions more transparent. The other concerns working time, which is
   limited by the notorious 35-hour week introduced by a Socialist
   government in 2000-02. The government has tried to lessen this
   constraint by making any time worked over 35 hours free of tax and
   social-insurance charges. So far, two-fifths of firms employing more
   than ten people have made use of this rule. But overtime rates must
   still be paid. Mr Fillon now says that working time itself should be
   discussed, in return for better pay, and that it should be negotiated
   company by company. The parties have been given until the end of March
   to reach an agreement.

   The coming months will also bring a broader review of pension rules.
   The pension reform that triggered a crippling nine-day strike last
   November touched only the 1.6m people in "special regimes": train
   drivers, railwaymen, gas and electricity workers and others entitled
   to a full pension after 37.5 years'-worth of contributions, against 40
   for everybody else. Now that the special-regime workers have accepted
   a longer contribution period, the overall rules are up for review. At
   the very least, the period is likely to go up to 41 years, but this
   change will be fiercely contested. A big demonstration is already
   planned for January 22nd. On top of all these plans, there are
   proposals to merge the job-placement and benefit agencies, to make
   certain company-tax breaks conditional on pay rises for the
   lowest-paid, to introduce a back-to-work benefit to make work pay more
   than welfare, and to break the stranglehold of the big five unions on
   worker representation.

   Will any of these measures help to lift France's growth rate from its
   recent meagre average of 2% a year? Judged by the standards of the
   Chirac years, when successive governments backed away from reforms in
   the face of street demonstrations and strikes, they constitute a
   veritable blast of reform. Before Mr Sarkozy came along, nobody dared
   to touch the special regimes, for instance, nor to attack the
   cherished 35-hour week.

   Yet a closer look at the Sarkozy method reveals some shortcomings. The
   first is a tendency to give ground to secure a headline-grabbing deal.
   Consider the reform of the special regimes, which Mr Sarkozy has
   presented as a done deal. In reality, despite acceptance of the
   "progressive lengthening" of the contribution period to 40 years, the
   only final agreement struck so far is at the RATP, which runs the
   Paris metro and bus system. In return for 40 years of contributions,
   it has agreed among other things to increase pay grades on which
   pension benefits are calculated. Yet without knowing the details
   (which the RATP will not divulge, on the ground that this is an
   internal matter) it is impossible to judge the net benefit.

   The second weakness is an instinct to micro-manage. Take the 35-hour
   week. Rather than just getting rid of the legal limit altogether, Mr
   Sarkozy has put in place a web of new rules and incentives to
   encourage everybody to ignore it. One is the tax break on overtime.
   Another is the request to bosses and unions to negotiate their own
   working-time deals. A third is a plan to allow employees who already
   work for more than 35 hours a week to cash in the days off that they
   get in return. Some companies give 22 such days, on top of normal paid
   holiday; vast stocks of these have built up over the years. Although
   employers like the idea of reducing these holiday promises, they will
   be less pleased to be invited to foot the bill. The upshot may turn
   out to be the death of the 35-hour week, but it is a mightily
   complicated way to go about it.

   The third worry over Mr Sarkozy is his attitude towards public
   finances. He has already postponed from 2010 until 2012 the
   government's promise to balance its budget. In 2008 the deficit is
   expected to be 2.3% of GDP, the widest gap in the euro zone (though
   less than in Britain). In the third quarter of 2007, public debt still
   amounted to 65.9% of GDP. Although Mr Sarkozy has stepped back from
   the gratuitous handouts that some observers had feared, there is a
   continuous struggle within the government between those arguing for
   tighter fiscal control and those content to spend come what may.

   The biggest problem, though, is that Mr Sarkozy is hoping for the
   first results of his reforms to come through at just the moment when
   the global credit crunch is hitting home, even in the euro area (see
   [4]article). Mr Sarkozy had hoped that his autumn "fiscal shock",
   worth nearly EUR11 billion ($15 billion) in 2008, would boost
   confidence and accelerate growth. But France has not felt it. Thanks
   in part to rising oil and food prices, household confidence has fallen
   sharply since September, and the French are feeling the squeeze on
   their pockets. In polls, they repeatedly cite "purchasing power" as
   their biggest worry. In December Mr Sarkozy's approval rating fell to
   49%, according to TNS-Sofres, a pollster, from a high of 65% in July.

   All of which is palpably frustrating for the French president, who
   sometimes talks of economic growth as if he thinks it can be bullied
   into doing better. He has repeatedly said that he wants GDP growth of
   3%, declaring that "I will not wait for growth, I will go and find
   it." Although the government forecasts 2-2.5% growth for 2008, most
   economists reckon it will be 1.7-1.8%. The restless Mr Sarkozy may
   find he has embarked on a long search.

