
   Doubts still hang over plans to form a united centre-left party

   FORTY years ago, two young men entered the elite Scuola Normale
   Superiore in Pisa: Fabio Mussi, son of a Tuscan steelworker, and
   Massimo D'Alema, son of a Communist lawmaker. The two formed a
   legendary comradeship, campaigning hard for the Italian Communist
   Party (PCI). When the PCI was wound up in 1991, both joined its
   successor, now known as the Left Democrats (DS). But even as Mr
   D'Alema, now foreign minister, edged closer to the ideas of Bill
   Clinton and Tony Blair, his friend stayed loyal to his blue-collar
   origins and became leader of the farthest left DS faction.

   On April 20th their friendship snapped. Appalled by the DS's plans to
   fuse with Democracy and Freedom (Margherita), the next-biggest party
   in Romano Prodi's centre-left government, Mr Mussi said he would quit.
   At a congress in Florence, he moved delegates to tears as he bid
   farewell. Mr D'Alema looked on impassively. The congress should be the
   DS's last. In the autumn, primaries are planned to choose a leader for
   the newly united Democratic Party.

   If the new party emerges, it will be Italy's biggest, and it may give
   Mr Prodi the political base he now lacks. But questions remain
   (besides the obvious risk that the birth may be aborted if the
   government collapses first). One is whether Mr Prodi, who promises to
   step down at the end of his present term, will be elected leader. He
   came fourth in a recent poll of voters; first choice was Walter
   Veltroni, mayor of Rome.

   Another question is where the new party will fit internationally. DS
   leaders, who dropped the hammer and sickle from their flag less than
   ten years ago, favour affiliating with the cross-Europe Party of
   European Socialists. But Francesco Rutelli, who leads Democracy and
   Freedom, said at his party's congress last weekend that this was
   "impossible".

   And that points to perhaps the biggest doubt: whether putting all of
   Italy's centre-leftists into one party can stop them warring. Mr Prodi
   wants the Democratic Party to be like its American namesake, but it
   will not be. Its leftmost tip may match the Democrats; but on the
   right it takes in members of Mr Rutelli's party who look more
   Republican. One, a member of the Catholic Opus Dei movement and
   fervently pro-life, proudly admits to wearing the cilice, an
   instrument of corporal mortification. You can bet Mr Clinton never did
   that.

