
   A former Russian prime minister reflects on the Kremlin today

   VIKTOR CHERNOMYRDIN, Russia's ambassador to Ukraine, is no
   Western-style democrat. Nor does this (now wealthy) founder of Gazprom
   and ex-prime minister pretend to be. Yet behind his tough Soviet-style
   exterior is a shrewd and idiosyncratic politician, who provides a
   refreshing burst of colour in a grey political landscape.

   Once termed syntactically challenged, he rarely completes sentences.
   When he does they turn into folklore, the best example of which ("we
   hoped for the best, but it turned out like always") is now a
   catchphrase in Russia. His description of the situation in Ukraine is
   equally apt: "It has never been like this and now it is exactly the
   same again." Many Ukrainians would agree.

   Mr Chernomyrdin deplores the condescending tone of the Russian media
   towards Ukraine. "These people have no idea of what is going on in
   Ukraine. We must show more respect--it will do us good. Boris Yeltsin
   understood this and never allowed himself to take this kind of tone."
   This is not the only thing that sets Yeltsin's former prime minister
   apart from today's Kremlin. "I don't quite understand the role of the
   government in Russia. What is it doing? Yeltsin and I had a clear
   division: he was in charge of politics and I was managing the economy.
   He never interfered."

   As prime minister, he chose people for their abilities not their
   views. "After work they could be whoever they wanted, but during the
   day they had to be professionals." Few liberal reforms in Russia
   happened without his support. In 1995 he negotiated on the phone with
   Shamil Basayev, a Chechen terrorist who took over 1,200 hostages in a
   hospital in the southern town of Budyonnovsk. "It was the most
   important thing for the country to understand that the new government
   cared about its people," he says. Mr Chernomyrdin's intervention saved
   hundreds of lives and led to peace talks with the rebels. It was a far
   cry from how the government (mis)handled the 2002 theatre siege in
   Moscow and the 2004 hostage crisis in Beslan.

   The formidable Mr Chernomyrdin took Yeltsin's death hard. "It is like
   with parents: while they are alive you feel you have your back
   covered, and when they go you feel you are on your own."

