
   The Bremen election deals a big setback to Germany's grand coalition


   THE election in Bremen will have no impact on federal politics, said
   Angela Merkel, the German chancellor, after meeting fellow Christian
   Democrats (of the CDU) on May 14th. The previous day, the Social
   Democrats (of the SPD) and Greens won enough votes in the city to
   replace the state's grand coalition, which mirrors the federal one.
   Jens Böhrnsen, boss of the Bremen SPD, has not yet ended his 12-year
   tie to the CDU, but he is likely to.

   Bremen has been an SPD fief for 60 years. Yet in the latest election,
   both main parties lost votes. The SPD took 37%, down from 42% four
   years ago; the CDU fell to 26%, down from 30%. The winners were the
   three smaller parties in opposition at federal level: the Greens, the
   Free Democrats and the Left Party, which will enter Bremen's
   parliament for the first time.

   Mr Böhrnsen may end his alliance with the CDU, but Kurt Beck, the SPD
   chairman, is unlikely to do likewise in Berlin. Mr Beck is less
   popular than Ms Merkel and his party is in crisis. SPD members are
   unhappy with his centrist policies and what they see as the party's
   loss of ideological identity. The Left Party, a mix of disaffected SPD
   members and ex-communists, attracts nostalgics in SPD heartlands.

   The SPD may need a more charismatic leader before the next federal
   election. But at present there is no alternative. Franz Müntefering,
   the vice-chancellor and labour minister, and Peter Struck, head of the
   SPD parliamentary group, are set to leave politics at the end of the
   grand coalition's term in office. A rumoured comeback by Gerhard
   Schröder, the former chancellor, seems implausible. Besides, Mr Beck
   has SPD friends who say he merely needs time to get his party under
   control--rather as Ms Merkel did, before becoming uncontested leader
   of the CDU.

   The coalition is likely to last at least until next year, when state
   elections are due in Hamburg, Bavaria, Lower Saxony and Hesse.
   Doubtless the SPD and the CDU will continue to bicker, as they did
   this week when their leaders met for inconclusive talks over the
   planned minimum wage. They did agree to triple the number of nursery
   places to 750,000 by 2013, and they compromised on the reform of
   inheritance taxes. This paves the way for a cut in corporate tax,
   because the SPD had linked its support of this with changes in the tax
   treatment of inheritance.

   In line with the normal German fondness for consensus politics, the
   leaders of the two big parties will continue to strike deals on most
   policy decisions. But two possible rows could yet spell an early end
   to the grand coalition. One would come about if the SPD were to insist
   on ending the deployment of German troops outside the NATO area. The
   other would come if the CDU were to seek to abolish Germany's
   co-determination system, under which big firms draw at least half
   their supervisory boards from the ranks of the workforce or trade
   unions.

   Ms Merkel is right to say that Bremen is not a barometer of public
   opinion. The Greens and the SPD would not get enough votes to form a
   government if a federal election were held today. Rather, the Free
   Democrats and the CDU might win a majority. That is the last thing the
   SPD wants--and a measure of Mr Beck's problems.

