
   Is Germany's economic boom bypassing its eastern states?


   "ONLY one person promised blossoming landscapes," says Peer
   Steinbrück. Looking proudly at Germany's booming economy, falling
   unemployment and bulging state coffers, the finance minister is trying
   to deflect objections that the five states of former East Germany have
   never enjoyed Helmut Kohl's 1990 pledge of economic nirvana. It takes
   a generation to help the new states to their feet, he says. Mr
   Steinbrück has no plan to change the "solidarity pact", under which
   western Germany will subsidise eastern Germany until 2019.

   Almost 17 years after unification, the new states have at least made
   some progress visually. A walk through the streets of central Rostock
   reveals the well-stocked flower beds, brightly coloured houses and
   outlets of Kaufhof, a department store, McDonald's, a fast-food chain,
   and Tchibo, a coffee shop, that are found in most western German
   towns. As Rostock prepares for the G8 summit in early June in nearby
   Heiligendamm, the mayor has planted signs saying "welcome" in 20
   languages.

   Yet appearances are deceptive. Since unification, some EUR1.5 trillion
   ($2 trillion) has been transferred east. Western Germany still hands
   over 4% of annual GDP, a net EUR80 billion, to eastern Germany, which
   is not being weaned off subsidies. Average unemployment of 15.2% is
   twice the western rate, and far higher than most other bits of central
   Europe (see chart). Wages are about one-third lower than in western
   Germany.

   The government wants to aim subsidies more sensibly. "We used to spray
   our funds evenly everywhere to kick-start consumption, but now we need
   to focus on investment in areas of growth," says Mr Steinbrück.
   Productivity is one-third below western levels. Annual sales of the
   100 biggest companies in the five new states add up to those of
   Siemens. Of the top 500 German companies, only 19 come from the former
   East Germany.

   In Mecklenburg-West Pomerania, Germany's poorest state, cities like
   Rostock are among the growth areas, thanks to a revival of shipping
   and tourism. Rostock has been through a rough patch. After
   unification, shipyards sacked thousands because the Russians, their
   main customers, could no longer afford their ships. But today the port
   makes money on ferry traffic to Scandinavia. Liebherr, a big maker of
   cranes, set up a new production site two years ago. Hotels are doing
   well: in the past 17 years, they have doubled their capacity. These
   are the region's new "lighthouses".

   Inland the picture is gloomier. Mecklenburg-West Pomerania is a flat
   agricultural state with 2,000 lakes, including Lake Müritz. Farm
   employment has dwindled from 200,000 in 1989 to 20,000, says Jürgen
   Seidel, the state's economics minister. There are few manufacturing
   employers. One is Mecklenburger Metallguss, in Waren, on the shore of
   Lake Müritz. It produced 130 propellers last year, including the
   world's biggest, weighing 130 tonnes with a diameter of 10 metres.
   Another booming business is a foundry in Torgelow in the state's east.
   It is a sign of a recovery, albeit from a low base, that 13,000 new
   jobs have been created in the state since April 2006, says Mr Seidel.

   Yet there is little sign of growth in many parts of West Pomerania
   that border Poland, in the Altmark region in Saxony-Anhalt or in the
   region of Prignitz in Brandenburg. "Some of these towns and villages
   will slowly die," predicts Mr Steinbrück. Unemployment in Demmin, in
   eastern Pomerania, is almost 30% of the workforce. The city's
   population has shrunk by a fifth in a few years. It is a fief of the
   far-right NPD, which won enough votes to enter the state parliament
   last September.

   To close the gap, eastern Germany must grow by more than the rest of
   the country, points out Karl-Heinz Paqué, a former finance minister in
   Saxony-Anhalt. This is already being done in areas around Magdeburg
   (car components), Dresden (electronics) and Jena (optics). The rest of
   Eastern Germany has only 12 more years to discover more such
   "lighthouses".

