
   A cross-dresser's troubles with a resurgent Islam

                                                                    Tempo
                                                                    Tempo

                                                 Razor-sharp and petulant


   FOR more than 30 years a cross-dresser with a razor-sharp wit and a
   merciless tongue has won the affection of millions of Turks. And his
   success on television has been vaunted as evidence of the tolerance of
   Turkey's unique mix of Islam and secularism.

   But for the past year Huysuz Virjin (the Petulant Virgin) has been
   replaced by his less exotic self, Seyfi Dursunoglu, in a show aired on
   a private television channel. The 76-year-old entertainer claims to
   have been forced to trade in his trademark blonde wig, silk stockings
   and sexy gowns for more conventional male garb after Turkey's
   broadcasting watchdog, the RTUK, put pressure on television stations
   to ban cross-dressing.

   RTUK denies such censorship. But Mr Dursunoglu insists that he is the
   victim of a creeping conservatism that he believes has infected the
   country ever since the mildly Islamist Justice and Development (AK)
   party came to power five years ago. Although he was allowed to appear
   in drag for a special new-year programme, he says that "as a
   performer, I am no longer as free". Similar concerns about artistic
   freedom and secularism were aired last month by Fazil Say, a Turkish
   pianist, who accused the AK party of being unfriendly.

   Debate over whether Turkey is veering off the determinedly secular
   course laid down by Ataturk has intensified ever since AK was returned
   to power for a second five-year term in last July's parliamentary
   election, when it took 47% of the vote. Most Turks are plainly unfazed
   by such fears. Recent opinion polls suggest that support for AK has
   risen to a record 52%. "There is no evidence of a systematic plan by
   the government to make Turkey more Islamic," concedes Nilufer Narli,
   an Istanbul-based sociologist. Yet she adds that "expressions of
   Islamic piety are becoming increasingly overt, indeed a vehicle for
   networking and social mobility."

   Awkwardly for AK, an openly gay fashion designer has emerged as its
   most passionate defender. Cemil Ipekci has declared that AK is the
   best government to have ruled the country in the history of the
   republic and that, had he been born a woman, "I would have covered my
   head [ie, Islamic-style]." Pressed to explain, a demure Mr Ipekci says
   "I am a conservative homosexual."

