
   The 2008 budget gives companies a break but leaves spending too high

   IN ITALY, Romano Prodi once mused, it can be hard "to distinguish the
   real issue--about which nobody ever talks--from the fictitious one
   which is fought over ferociously." Rarely has that been truer than of
   the debate over the draft 2008 budget presented by Mr Prodi's
   centre-left government. Ironically the person responsible for the
   confusion is Mr Prodi himself.

   On September 29th he emerged from an 11-hour cabinet meeting to
   announce that the low-paid would get reduced property taxes and either
   an income-tax break or a cash handout. But he scarcely mentioned the
   most significant measure: a cut in the corporate-tax rate from 33% to
   27.5%. The budget also trims a regional business tax. Together, these
   may boost the economy without unleashing inflation, which might flow
   from income-tax cuts of the sort being urged by the opposition.

   For public consumption, it is being said that this apparent giveaway
   to industry will not cost a cent, because the budget also widens the
   corporate-tax base by scrapping many tax breaks. But officials
   privately admit that this is nonsense. The corporate-tax rate is to
   fall by a sixth, which will soak up much of the extra EUR18 billion
   ($25 billion) that Mr Prodi's finance minister, Tommaso
   Padoa-Schioppa, has raked in by squeezing tax evaders.

   The reason nobody admits this is to avoid upsetting Italy's trade
   unions and their allies in government, who could bring down Mr Prodi's
   shaky coalition. The left has already forced him to water down pension
   reforms. The unions have secured a modest EUR700m package of welfare
   reforms that they are now putting to a vote of their members. A
   rejection would be disastrous. So this is not a good moment to be
   highlighting what many Italians might see as a bosses' bonanza.

   Mr Padoa-Schioppa claims that his budget will reduce the deficit from
   2.4% of GDP this year to just 2.2% in 2008, less than in Britain and
   France. He also expects the public debt to shrink from 105% to 103.5%
   of GDP. This is not enough for the rating agencies, which have
   grumbled that he ought to do more to repair Italy's public finances.
   But Mr Padoa-Schioppa has reversed a trend of rising deficits and debt
   only by inflicting real pain--not only by improving tax collection but
   also by raising tax rates. The government had to give a sign to
   payroll employees, who cannot dodge because their tax is deducted at
   source, that there are benefits from the clampdown on the less honest
   of their self-employed peers.

   A more pertinent criticism of the 2008 budget is that it again shrinks
   from spending cuts. The public sector takes over half of Italy's GDP,
   and it spends it badly. Waste, corruption, overstaffing and
   underperformance make for a huge burden on the economy. It is an issue
   about which Mr Padoa-Schioppa cares passionately. Last month, his
   department sent a "green book" to ministers detailing where they could
   make cuts. But that would pit them against trade unions and other
   vested interests. It is perhaps too much to ask of politicians with a
   single-vote majority in the upper house of parliament.

