
                                                                    Gamma

                                   Gamma

   Russia's wars in Chechnya, which the Kremlin says are over, have
   shaped the country that Russians and the world are now living with


   LIKE a high-end bar mitzvah, only with more weapons, the inauguration
   of Ramzan Kadyrov was held in a giant white marquee, in the grounds of
   one of his palaces, near the Chechen city of Gudermes. The
   guests--Russian officers who were once his enemies, rival warlords
   squirming in dress uniforms, muftis in lambskin hats--brought
   sycophantic portraits, cars and other gifts fit for a Caucasian
   potentate. As his pet lions gnawed on their bones outside, Chechnya's
   new president made a speech, as short and nervous as a schoolboy's, in
   which he vowed to continue the reconstruction of his wretched
   semi-autonomous Russian republic.

   Everyone applauded--and everyone knew the ceremony was irrelevant. Mr
   Kadyrov has in effect ruled Chechnya since his father Akhmad, also its
   president, was blown up in 2004. His authority is based on violence,
   and the backing of Vladimir Putin, Russia's president. Mr Putin
   levered Ramzan into his father's post soon after he reached 30, the
   minimum age for the job.

   Superficially, Mr Kadyrov deserves it. Apartment blocks are adorned
   with cultish posters of Ramzan: with his father; riding a horse; being
   awarded his Hero of Russia medal by Mr Putin. Behind the posters, many
   buildings are still pockmarked or gaping with shell holes. But many
   others have been rebuilt on Mr Kadyrov's watch. "He helps everyone,"
   says a woman in Grozny, just returned from exile to a refurbished
   building near Minutka Square, once the site of savage fighting.
   Another Grozny resident says gratefully that Mr Kadyrov's men repaired
   all the battle-smashed windows in his neighbourhood.

   So the Kremlin has some evidence for its assertion that the two wars
   fought to quell Chechen separatism--the first rashly launched by Boris
   Yeltsin in 1994, the second beginning in 1999--are now over. Chechnya
   is still part of Russia, and any other would-be secessionists have
   seen the bloody price the Chechens have paid: perhaps 100,000
   civilians dead, and many more displaced.

   But what kind of Russia is it part of? War with Russia has deformed
   Chechnya. But perhaps more than anything else in Russia's post-Soviet
   history, the forgotten Chechen wars have shaped the angry and
   authoritarian country Russia has become.

   Mr Putin made Mr Kadyrov president; but Chechnya helped to make Mr
   Putin himself president of Russia. Were it not for the air of
   emergency engendered by the second Chechen war, which began when Mr
   Putin was prime minister, the lightening rise of this obscure ex-KGB
   officer would have met more resistance. The war, and the string of
   mysterious apartment bombings that preceded it, brought the FSB (the
   renamed security service that Mr Putin briefly led) back to the centre
   of Russian politics. And it has been the cause, or the pretext, for
   many of the hard-line policies of the Putin presidency.

   Russia's gathering suspicion towards the West can be traced in part to
   the autumn of 2004, and Beslan. It was in that town that terrorists
   demanding Russia withdraw from Chechnya, and a botched rescue attempt,
   killed over 330 people, most of them children. Mr Putin used the
   catastrophe as an excuse to change parliamentary rules and scrap
   elections for regional governors (who are now all, like Mr Kadyrov,
   appointed by the Kremlin). And he lashed out at foreign powers which,
   he said, were scheming to weaken Russia.

   Whether or not he really believed that knee-jerk explanation, the
   aftermath of Beslan embittered Mr Putin's relations with the United
   States and Europe (along with the "orange revolution" in Ukraine soon
   afterwards, which the Kremlin saw as a Western-backed coup). He had
   sought to portray Chechnya as another front in the "war on terror",
   and was outraged when Western diplomats questioned his post-Beslan
   political reforms and Russian policy in the north Caucasus. He became
   ever more concerned to counteract American power; Chechnya also helped
   to determine one of his methods, namely Russia's renewed courtship of
   its Soviet-era Arab allies. Dabbling in the Middle East--fraternising
   with Hamas, prevaricating on Iran--offers a chance to assuage Muslim
   anger over Chechnya, at the same time as frustrating the Americans.

   And the Chechen tragedy helps to explain why Mr Putin's neurotic
   bluster plays so well among ordinary Russians. Their country may not
   be a proper democracy, but the Kremlin is still nervously responsive
   to shifts in the national mood. Partly because of Chechnya, that mood
   has become increasingly xenophobic.

   Perhaps out of an old solidarity, says one Chechen who has lived in St
   Petersburg and Moscow, Russians were sympathetic to Chechnya's plight
   during the first war. Few are today, especially since the conflict
   leapt up to Moscow itself, via multiple terrorist bombings and the
   theatre siege of 2002, in which 130 hostages died. Alexei Levinson, a
   sociologist, charitably sees today's antagonism towards Chechens as a
   displaced form of guilt. Inside, he speculates, Russians know the
   Chechens have long been wronged, from tsarist colonisation, through
   Stalin's deportation of the entire Chechen nation in 1944, to the
   atrocities that untrammelled media coverage of the first war conveyed
   to the nation. Whatever its cause, the fear and suspicion are fierce,
   and have fed a widening loathing of foreigners.

   No limits

   But even as it elevated Russia's spooks, and puffed up their paranoia,
   Chechnya demonstrated and contributed to the chronic weakening of
   another once-mighty institution, the army. Before the first war
   started, Yeltsin's defence minister boasted that Grozny would be taken
   in two hours. Two years later, with the army exposed as woefully
   trained and equipped, it ended in humiliating defeat.

   When the second one began--now with the Kadyrovs switching sides to
   fight alongside the Russians--the brutal tactics were more effective.
   The atrocities were less well publicised, especially after the
   forcible takeover of NTV, Russia's last independent national
   television station. Chechnya was thus a factor in the first big
   skirmish of another of Mr Putin's campaigns, against media freedom.
   Today, real information about life (and death) in Chechnya comes from
   human-rights groups and a few brave journalists, of whom there are
   fewer still after last year's (unsolved) murder of Anna Politkovskaya.

   Chechnya, as Russian soldiers put it, became a place "without limits".
   Extra pay for combat (real or invented), and the kickbacks required to
   claim it, were only the most mundane form of graft. There was also
   kidnapping, the sale of stolen weapons to the enemy and enough oil to
   kill for. The benighted Chechens were not the only victims of the
   amorality. Some Russian officers were alleged to have sold their own
   conscripts to the rebels. Wild abuse of power became normal. Sergei,
   from Siberia, was shot in the back by a drunken officer in Chechnya in
   2003--because, he says, of a row over a woman. Sergei, who now walks
   with a cane, says serving in Chechnya was like "sticking my head in a
   refuse pit".

   This depravity and callousness--each year, more Russian soldiers die
   outside combat than Americans die in Iraq--has helped to generate
   wholesale dodging of Russia's biannual draft. (Conscripts are no
   longer supposed to go to Chechnya, but many still do, says Valentina
   Melnikova, of the Union of Soldiers' Mothers.) Families who can afford
   to save their sons from service do so by paying corrupt recruitment
   officers and doctors. One result, as a top air-force officer recently
   complained, is that those who are drafted are often already sick,
   malnourished or addicted. Another is the exacerbation of social
   tensions in what is a perilously unequal country.

   As with all wars, the starkest toll of Chechnya's are the dead, who as
   well as the slaughtered Chechens officially include around 10,000
   federal troops, and unofficially many more. Then there are the tens of
   thousands of injured, such as Dima, who lives with his parents in a
   grotty apartment on the outskirts of Moscow. In December 1999, Dima
   was shot in the chest in the village of Alkhan-Yurt. He heard the air
   rushing out of his lungs; then he was wounded again. He lay bleeding,
   eating snow, and preparing to die, but lived after a doctor bet his
   colleagues two bottles of vodka that he could be saved. Two pieces of
   shrapnel stayed in his back. "I lost my health forever when I was 20,"
   says Dima, who was incapacitated for two years; terrible years, says
   his mother. Alkhan-Yurt, meanwhile, became infamous for the butchery
   and rape committed there by the Russians soon afterwards.

   Still, Dima, now at college, is relatively lucky. Many of the 1m-plus
   Chechnya veterans came back alcoholic, unemployable and anti-social,
   suffering what soon became known as "the Chechen syndrome". This
   widespread experience of army mistreatment and no-limits warfare has
   contributed to Russia's extraordinary level of violent crime: the
   murder rate is 20 times western Europe's. But the cruelty is also
   reproducing itself in a less well-known and more organised way.

   As well as the army, thousands of policemen across Russia have served
   in Chechnya. Many return with disciplinary and psychological problems,
   says Tanya Lokshina of Demos, a human-rights group. They also bring
   back extreme tactics that they proceed to apply at home, such as the
   sorts of cordons and mass detentions deployed against peaceful
   protesters in Moscow and St Petersburg in April. Torture, concluded a
   recent report by Amnesty International, is endemic among Russian
   police. It is often used to extract confessions, but not always: a
   survey by Russian researchers found that most victims of police
   violence thought it had been perpetrated for fun.

   Tail wags dog

   Is the war truly over, as the Kremlin says it is? Despite the loss of
   most of their leaders--and somewhat incredibly, considering Chechnya's
   tiny size--an unknown number of insurgents are still fighting for what
   they call the Islamic republic of Ichkeria. They are still killing the
   local forces, under Mr Kadyrov, to whom most of the fighting has been
   outsourced. But Russians are still dying too.

   So are Chechen civilians. Grigory Shvedov, of [4]Caucasian Knot, an
   independent news service, says the number of "disappearances" has
   fallen dramatically in the past few years; but they still happen with
   scandalous frequency. The Council of Europe has repeatedly rebuked Mr
   Kadyrov and Russia over persistent torture and illegal detention. The
   decade of trauma, says a Chechen psychologist, has resulted in a spike
   in suicides, especially of people in their 30s whose lives have been
   derailed.

   In Grozny's Kadyrov Square a young man complains that there is no work
   outside the government and security services. It is an open secret
   that Mr Kadyrov's reconstruction push is funded through extorted
   contributions from those lucky enough to have jobs. The vast sums sent
   by Moscow for the purpose have largely vanished into thin air.

   And instability and violence have skipped across Chechnya's borders to
   the neighbouring north Caucasus republics, themselves cursed by
   poverty, ethnic tensions and government that is bad even by Russian
   standards. The grimmest is Ingushetia, where Husen Mutaliyev was once
   a used-car salesman and father of a baby girl. Since a spell learning
   Arabic in Egypt, says his brother Hasan, the police had harassed
   Husen. Early on March 15th, Hasan says, around 20 masked men seized
   Husen from his house. "We are Putin's soldiers," was all they offered
   by way of identification. They beat him, then shot him when he tried
   to escape. His body was returned the next day. Around 15,000 Chechen
   refugees are still living squalidly in Ingushetia, in train wagons,
   warehouses and goods containers. Some are still afraid; some have
   nothing left in Chechnya to go back to.

   One fear is that the local resentments such treatment provokes could
   eventually join up into a pan-Caucasian insurgency, intensified by the
   radical Islam that the wars have helped to foster. The biggest risk,
   however, may be Mr Kadyrov himself. At 30, he is ruler of what Dmitri
   Trenin of the Carnegie Moscow Centre describes as a "medieval
   khanate", within a country that is still more an empire than a modern
   state. He has appointed a regional government comprised largely of
   ex-rebels like himself. If he lives--and for all their theatrical
   obeisance, some of Chechnya's other strongmen loathe him, as do many
   Russian officers--what more might he want?

   Mr Putin, his partner and patron, is due to leave office in 2008. Mr
   Kadyrov is already testing the limits of his authority; though Moscow
   denies it, his men sometimes scuffle with federal troops. One day, it
   might even suit the Kremlin to encourage this truculence. For now, it
   needs a stable Chechnya to reassure Russians ahead of next year's
   presidential election; in the future, it might again need an unstable
   one.

   Like his own political career, the country Mr Putin will bequeath has
   been formed by its long, coarsening Chechen misadventure. Mr Putin's
   Russia has become a sort of tamer version of Mr Kadyrov's Chechnya. In
   both, improvements in living standards have won the approval of
   populations who have come to expect tragically little from their
   leaders--a mended window, say, or a pension that is paid on time. But
   government in both rests on power rather than the law, and has
   oppressed too many while improving the lot of most. The big question
   for Russia, Chechnya and the world is whether the symbiotic reigns of
   the Chechen warlord and the Russian spook are necessary codas to
   tumultuous times, or the incubators of yet more instability and pain.

